	1. The Start of the Adventure
	The beginning of the game introduces you to Professor Oak,
one of the main authorities of Pokemon.  Choose your name and
the name of your Rival, and you will begin the game in your room.
Throughout the walkthrough I will refer to your Rival as Gary.
Check out the PC in the top-right corner, go to ITEMS, and get
POTION.  This will be useful in just a few minutes.  Head
downstairs and say goodbye to your mom, then go outside.
	This next section of the game is the first part where there
is a difference in what happens between the Red/Blue and Yellow
versions.  In this section I will divide it into two equal
parts:
Red/Blue and Yellow.

RED/BLUE: Walk north a bit to see the exit of the town and enter
the grassy area.  Immediately Professor Oak appears and stops
you, saying it's too dangerous for you to go out without a
Pokemon for protection.  He takes you inside his lab, where your
Rival, Gary awaits.  Oak gives you a choice of three level 5
Pokemon to take with you to begin your journey.  Each one has
Its strengths and weaknesses, which I will detail below:

Charmander: A Fire-type.  Charmander has a high Speed stat, but
it will be difficult for beginners to progress early in the game
because it does not do well against the first couple Gym
Leaders. Raising strong supporting Pokemon to help Charmander is vital if
you choose him.
Squirtle: A Water-type.  Squirtle is the more Defense-oriented
ofthe three starters, and is a good overall choice for beginners
and experienced players alike.  You shouldn't have to raise a
supporting Pokemon right away, which gives you more flexibility
in choosing your team.
Bulbasaur: A Grass/Poison type.  Bulbasaur has the highest
Special Attack of the three, making it the best pure offensive
type.  He is the best choice for beginners, because he can very
easily plow through the first few gyms, giving you lots of time
to make decisions for supporting Pokemon.
	After you make your choice, Gary steps in to choose which
Pokemon he wants.  No matter which one you choose, Gary will
automatically choose the one that is naturally stronger than
yours.  If you chose Charmander, he chooses Squirtle
(Water>Fire); if you chose Squirtle, he chooses Bulbasaur
(Grass>Water); and if you chose Bulbasaur, he chooses Charmander
(Fire>Grass).  Make sure to save your game after he's done,
because when you try to leave, Gary will challenge you with his
new Pokemon!

RIVAL Gary $175
Squirtle, level 5-Tackle, Tail Whip (72 EXP.)
OR Bulbasaur, level 5-Tackle, Growl (75 EXP.)
OR Charmander, level 5-Scratch, Growl (69 EXP.)

	This battle shouldn't be too challenging if you got POTION
from the PC; if not, it could be frustrating!  Just keep using
your Pokemon's base attack (Tackle or Scratch), and don't bother
with the stat-reducing moves; once you're down to very low
health, use POTION and you should be able to quickly despose of
Gary's Pokemon.  If you didn't grab the item, though, you have
to hope that Gary wastes his time using the stat-reducing moves.
	Once you win, your starter should gain a level, you get
some cash (up to $3175 by now), and Gary leaves.

YELLOW: Walk north and you should see some grass, where the edge
of the town is.  Walk into the grass a little bit and Professor
Oak appears, warning you not to walk in tall grass without a
Pokemon to protect you.  Just then, a wild Electric-type Pikachu
attacks!  Oak uses his Poke Ball to capture it, then takes you
to his lab where Gary, your Rival, is waiting.  Oak motions to the
Poke Ball on the table, offering it to you as your first
Pokemon. Right when you move to get it, though, Gary pushes you aside and
claims it for his own (the Poke Ball contains an Eevee), so Oak
instead gives you the Pikachu he caught earlier.  Make sure to
save the game now, because Gary is about to test his new Pokemon
on you!  Try to leave and Gary approaches you.

RIVAL Gary $175
Eevee, level 5-Tackle, Tail Whip (97 EXP.)

	This battle should be pretty easy.  Your Pikachu knows
Thunderbolt, so with repeated attacks from it, Eevee should go
down fairly quickly.  In addition, Thunderbolt has a chance of
paralyzing the opponent, which incredibly slows it down and has
a 25% chance of preventing the opponent from attacking for a turn.
And if Pikachu's HP goes down to dangerous levels, just use
POTION from your PC you got earlier.
	After your victory, Pikachu gains a level and you get some
cash!  Gary leaves in a huff.

PALLET TOWN Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	Now all three versions meet up in the same place again.
Leave the lab and go outside, then head north to exit Pallet
Town and enter Route 1.

ROUTE 1 Wild Pokemon:
Pidgey -Very Common (R,B,Y)
Rattata -Very Common (R,B,Y)

	As you can see, there are only two Pokemon across Route 1,
Rattata and Pidgey, and they're at low levels (2-4).  Make your
way north and talk to the Poke Mart employee who gives you a
free POTION.  Continue north, battling a couple wild Pokemon to raise
your starter's level to 7.  Be sure to Run from the wild
encounters, however, if your Pokemon sustains too much damage.
The boy gives you a tip on how to jump down the ledges you see
on this route.  Eventually you should reach Viridian City.
	If you want, you can explore a little bit, talking to
people in houses such, but you can't advance north yet because a grumpy
old man is blocking the road right now.  Locate the Poke Center
near the entrance to the city.  These buildings heal all the
Pokemon in your party for free, so go there whenever you need
to. Nearby should be the Poke Mart, your objective.  Enter it and
the store clerk calls you over to hand you OAK'S PARCEL.  Go back to
Pallet Town by Route 1.
	Enter Oak's lab to give him the parcel, and Gary struts
back in, saying Oak had called him for something.  Oak then explains
to you both what he wants you to do.  He wants you to go on a
journey throughout Kanto to capture all 150 Pokemon that exist
and record them in the Pokedex he gives you.  After he gives
both of you the Pokedexes, Gary explains that he doesn't need your
help and he will capture them all before you do.  Well, we can't
let that happen, right?  Now your adventure begins; let's get to
it!



________________________________________________________________
	2. Boulder Badge
	Pokedex in hand, journey back through Route 1 to Viridian
City (your starter should be at level 8 by now).  Head straight
for the Poke Mart after healing at the Poke Center.

Viridian City Poke Mart:
Poke Ball -$200
Antidote -$100
Parlyz Heal -$200
Burn Heal -$250

Viridian City Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Poliwag- Common (R,B,Y)
Tentacool- Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	Now that you have the Pokedex you can capture Pokemon, so
buy at least 10 Poke Balls ($2000) from the clerk.  I also
suggest buying one or two Antidotes for the treck through
Viridian Forest ahead.  Go to the north end of Viridian City to
get a little demo on catching Pokemon using Poke Balls from the
old man.  In Red and Blue, he successfully catches the wild
Weedle, but in Yellow, he fails.  Basically, the concept is
simple: Use your Pokemon's attacks to wittle away at the wild
Pokemon's health, then throw Poke Balls at it to capture it.  It
helps even more if you add a status ailment like Paralysis
(using Pikachu's Thunderbolt) or Sleep.  Go back down to Route 1 and
test your training by capturing both a wild Rattata and Pidgey.

	After doing that, return to Viridian and go westward.  You
should see a narrow path leading north as you go left; head up
that path and press A next to the weird-looking tree to get a
POTION.  Head back down and continue left to find Route 22.
There is another strange tree to the south next to the city
lake; after learning Cut, you can return here and Cut that tree down
and talk to the man there to receive TM42:Dream Eater.

Route 22 Wild Pokemon:
Land:
Rattata -Very Common (R,B,Y)
Spearow -Common (R,B,Y)
Nidoran(f) -Very Common (B,Y), Common (R)
Nidoran(m) -Very Common (R,Y), Common (B)
Mankey -Common (R,Y)
Water:
Poliwag- Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	As you can see, there are somewhat more diverse types of
Pokemon in this route.  It is imperative that you eventually
capture a Flying-type Pokemon, so you have one to use FLY later
in the game.  If you're playing Yellow or you chose Charmander
at the beginning, you need a supporting Pokemon, and this is a good
place to start.  Mankey is the best choice for immediate results
because it learns Low Kick soon, but a Butterfree (evolved from
a Caterpie, found in Viridian Forest) may even be better.  Nidoran
male or female is a very good choice for a team member as well
in the long run (as a TM hogger with good stats), but it won't
stand much of a chance against Brock, leader of Pewter Gym.  The
choice is yours: If you started out with Pikachu or Charmander, choose
either Mankey or Butterfree for Brock, bringing along a Nidoran
if you want.
	Even if you started with Squirtle or Bulbasaur, it's a good
idea to get a supporting Pokemon now, because Gary is about to
have a rematch with you!  He'll challenge you if you try to go
left above the patch of grass on Route 22.  Make sure your
Pokemon are at least level 8 or 9 beforehand.

RIVAL Gary $280
RED/BLUE:
Pidgey, level 9- Gust, Sand Attack (105 EXP.)
Squirtle, level 8- Tackle, Tail Whip, Bubble (114 EXP.)
OR Bulbasaur, level 8- Tackle, Growl, Leech Seed (117 EXP.)
OR Charmander, level 8- Scratch, Growl (111 EXP.)

	Looks like your Rival beefed up in a short time!  Remember
that this is an optional battle, so feel free to skip it and
move onto Viridian Forest if you want, although you'll be missing out
on lots of Experience Points.
	Pidgey will probably be the more challenging of the two,
due to its Sand-Attack and higher level.  Wear it down with strong
physical attacks from your starter, and switch out if its
accuracy is reduced too much.  As for Gary's starter, Squirtle
and Charmander haven't changed that much (Bubble is just a weak
Water attack), but Bulbasaur has learned Leech Seed, a dangerous
move that weakens your Pokemon while healing his at the same
time.  Take it out as soon as possible with whichever Pokemon of
yours has the more health left after Pidgey.

YELLOW:
Spearow, level 9- Peck, Growl, Leer (111 EXP.)
Eevee, level 8- Tackle, Tail Whip, Sand-Attack (157 EXP.)

	This battle should be easier in Yellow version.  Use
Pikachu's Thundershock to easily take down Spearow, and wear out
Eevee as much as you can with him and switch when his health or
accuracy gets too low, then finish Eevee off.

	After beating Gary for the second time in a row, he again
taunts you and runs off.  Good job!  Catch the Nidorans,
Spearow, and Mankey on this route to further your Pokedex along.  Don't
bother going left from this route; it leads to the Pokemon
League which you have no way of accessing yet.  Return to Viridian
City. To the right of the old man who showed you how to use Poke
Balls, there should be a gym.  Unfortunately it's locked for now and no
one knows where the leader is, but don't worry, he'll be back

eventually!
	Go up from Viridian to Route 2.

ROUTE 2 Wild Pokemon
Caterpie -Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgey -Very Common (R,B,Y)
Rattata -Very Common (R,B,Y)
Nidoran(f) -Common (Y)
Nidoran(m) -Common (Y)

	There isn't much to see on this route, especially if you've
already been to Route 22.  Just continue on, through the
building and into Viridian Forest.

VIRIDIAN FOREST Wild Pokemon
Caterpie -Very Common (B,Y), Common (R)
Metapod -Common (B,Y), Rare (R)
Weedle -Very Common (R), Common (B)
Kakuna -Common (R), Common (B)
Pidgey -Common (Y)
Pidgeotto -Rare (Y)
Pikachu -Rare (R,B)

	Viridian Forest, home of a bunch of new Bug-type Pokemon.
Be sure to catch all the available types of bugs, and in Yellow,
you might even see a Pidgeotto!  The most important Pokemon to
catch in these parts in Red/Blue, however, is Pikachu.  It may
be very tough to find one, but this is the only opportunity in the
game to capture one until much later.  If you face a wild
Metapod and Kakuna and you've already caught one, be sure to
defeat it with your Pokemon because all they do is Harden, a defensive
move and they dish out good experience.  If they wear your Pokemon's
PP down, just go back and refill at the Poke Center.
	Now remember, if you chose Charmander or Pikachu as your
starter, you need a supporting Pokemon in your upcoming battle
against Brock!  If you didn't get a Mankey from Route 22, then
capture a Caterpie right here and now.  Raise it to level 7 so
it evolves into a Metapod, then raise the Metapod to level 10 so it
becomes a Butterfree and learns Confusion, an extremely useful
move.  Beedrill (Weedle's final evolution) is also available,
but it does not learn Confusion, rendering it almost useless.

	This is the first part of the game where you will face
normal trainers.  Remember, if you get poisoned, either use an
Antidote or quickly head back to the Poke Center.  The trainers
in Viridian Forest in the Red/Blue versions are actually quite
different in the Yellow version, so I will have a separate
walkthru of this area for both R/B and Y.

RED/BLUE: Go left from the entrance, up the narrow path and to
the left to find a Poke Ball.  Head back to the entrance and go
right, then up the path past the trainer who doesn't challenge
you.  Go up little bit more to start your first regular trainer
battle!


BUG CATCHER $60
Weedle, level 6- Poison Sting, String Shot (66 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 6- Tackle, String Shot (67 EXP.)

	He wasn't too hard, right?  Continue up the path past a
long patch of grass to face a second trainer.

BUG CATCHER $70
Red version:
Weedle, level 7- Poison Sting, String Shot (78 EXP.)
Kakuna, level 7- Harden (106 EXP.)
Weedle, level 7- Poison Sting, String Shot (78 EXP.)
Blue version:
Caterpie, level 7- Tackle, String Shot (79 EXP.)
Metapod, level 7- Harden (108 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 7- Tackle, String Shot (79 EXP.)

	Go up the left side of the path above to get ANTIDOTE.  The
next path splits, but they both end up in the same place.

Follow the path down along the very long grass patch, up another one,
and down another one.  In the little cranny to the right you
should find a POTION, and continuing left and up along the path
pits you against the last trainer of the area.

BUG CATCHER $90
Red version:
Weedle, level 9- Poison Sting, String Shot (99 EXP.)
Blue version:
Caterpie, level 9- Tackle, String Shot (100 EXP.)

	This should be easy.  Now just follow the path up to escape
Viridian Forest!


YELLOW: Go left from the entrance, and you should almost
immediately see a female trainer in the grass patch to the left.
Challenge her!

LASS $90
Nidoran(f), level 6- Growl, Tackle (75 EXP.)
Nidoran(m), level 6- Leer, Tackle (76 EXP.)

	After the easy battle, head up the path above you and turn
left to pick up a Poke Ball.  Return to the entrance, then take
the right path.  Go up past the trainer who doesn't challenge
you, and head north to encounter a Bug Catcher.

BUG CATCHER $70
Caterpie, level 7- Tackle, String Shot (79 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 7- Tackle, String Shot (79 EXP.)

	Continue up along the path to face another Bug Catcher.

BUG CATCHER $60
Metapod, level 6- Harden (91 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 6- Tackle, String Shot (67 EXP.)
Metapod, level 6- Harden (91 EXP.)

	Go up the left side of the path to get ANTIDOTE.  The path
above branches, but it ends up in the same place, so just follow
it left and down.  You should see another Bug Catcher, and this
is one that's not in Red/Blue at all.

BUG CATCHER $80
Caterpie, level 8- Tackle, String Shot (90 EXP.)
Metapod, level 8- Tackle, String Shot, Harden (123 EXP.)

	As you can see, this Bug Catcher was a little smarter than
the others and evolved his Metapod so it retained its offensive
moves; however, it still has crappy Attack.  After defeating
him, continue up and down the long patches of grass.  At the bottom
of the second grass-patch, you should see a little cranny to the
right; pick up the POTION there.  Now go left and up to meet the
final trainer of the area.

BUG CATCHER $100
Caterpie, level 10- Tackle, String Shot (112 EXP.)

	After the quick fight, walk up the final patch of grass to
find the exit.

	Now that you're out of Viridian Forest, you find yourself
on the other side of Route 2.  This grass-patch contains the same
Pokemon as were on the other side, so it's okay to just skip
over it.  Just a little farther north and you've found Pewter City!
	This city is the home of the first gym leader you will
challenge on your adventure: Brock, the master of Rock Pokemon.
Feel free to look around the city first, chatting with locals if
you want, but there isn't that much else to do.  Check in at the
Poke Mart; you probably need more Poke Balls by now, and
possibly some Potions for the gym.

Pewter City Poke Mart:
Poke Ball -$200
Potion -$300
Escape Rope -$550
Antidote -$100
Burn Heal -$250
Awakening -$200
Paralyz Heal -$200

	Escape Rope is an item that exits you out of any cave and
back to the nearest Poke Center.  It's useful if you feel like
you're lost and your Pokemon are low on health, but it's pretty
expensive.
	Next to the Mart is a boy who will show you the Museum if
you haven't been there yet.  It has some pretty cool stuff in it
that may interest you like some lost fossils and space
artifacts, but it's optional.  It's only $50 so go ahead and
try it out.
	If you try to leave Pewter City to the right you will be
stopped, so let's head to the gym right now.  It's below the
museum and slightly to the left.

PEWTER CITY GYM
Style: Rock
	Well here it is, your first gym!  If you've raised your
Pokemon to at least level 12 and have 1 or 2 supporting Pokemon
if you chose Pikachu or Charmander at the beginning, you're all
set!  There's one lone trainer in your way before Brock.  You
can skip him by going around the back path, but you'll be missing
experience, so go up and challenge him.

JR. TRAINER(m)
Red/Blue: $220
Diglett, level 11- Scratch (190 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 11- Scratch, Sand-Attack (219 EXP.)
Yellow: $180
Diglett, level 9- Scratch (156 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 9- Scratch (178 EXP.)

	As you can see, this trainer uses Ground-types different
from those you've seen before.  A Squirtle or Bulbasaur, using
Bubble/Water Gun or Vine Whip, respectively, can quickly take
them out, and Charmander should be able to put a big dent into
them as well with Ember.  If you're in Yellow version, though,
watch out!  Since Pikachu can't put a dent into Ground-types,
you have to use either your Butterfree or Mankey that you've
hopefully trained well up to this time.
	Now you should be ready to take on Brock!

GYM LEADER Brock (uses Potion) TM34:Bide, Boulder Badge
Red/Blue:  $1386
Geodude, level 12- Tackle, Defense Curl (220 EXP.)
Onix, level 14- Tackle, Screech, Bide (324 EXP.)
Yellow: $1188
Geodude, level 10- Tackle (183 EXP.)
Onix, level 12- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Bide (277 EXP.)

	Brock begins the battle by sending out his Geodude.  It's a
Rock/Ground type, so Squirtle and Bulbasaur users can very
easily take it out with Bubble/Water Gun or Vine Whip.  Geodude is
resistant to Fire, however, and completely immune to Electric,
so supports may be needed.  Use Mankey's Low Kick (super-effective
to Rock) or Butterfree's Confusion to take it out.  Geodude
itself in Red/Blue is defensive, using Defense Curl to toughen
up its Defense a few times before attacking, but in Yellow, it's a
straight Tackle barrage.
	After Geodude comes the giant Rock/Ground type Onix; it can
be tough to deal with if you're new to Pokemon.  Again, Squirtle
and Bulbasaur should be able to blow it away no problem, but
support for the others is needed.  In Red/Blue, Onix uses Bide
almost exclusively; it's a TM move that absorbs attacks for 2-3
turns then unleashes twice the amount of damage it received in
that period on the defending Pokemon.  So if Onix uses Bide,
either use stat-lowering attacks or finish it off as fast as you
can!  In Yellow, Onix adds Bind into the mix, an attack which
traps your Pokemon for several turns so it can't move;
fortunately, it has low Attack power.  Finally, beware of
Screech, because it severely drops your Pokemon's Defense and
leaves it open for a strong attack.
	Once you defeat Onix, you win!  In addition to the cash and
Experience Points, you get TM34:Bide (you should know what it
does now) and the Boulder Badge!  Congratulations on receiving
your first badge!  Heal up at the Center and head left from
Pewter City to begin the next leg of the adventure.



_________________________________________________
	3. Cascade Badge
	Enter Route 3.  Prepare yourself for a slew of trainer
battles!  These are tougher trainers than the ones found in
Viridian Forest.  Challenge the lass to the immediate right
first.

LASS $135
Pidgey, level 9- Gust, Sand-Attack (105 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 9- Gust, Sand-Attack (105 EXP.)

	Go a little north to fight a Bug Catcher you've seen
before.

BUG CATCHER $100
Caterpie, level 10- Tackle, String Shot (112 EXP.)
Weedle, level 10- Poison Sting, String Shot (111 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 10- Tackle, String Shot (112 EXP.)

	Now go slightly left to fight a new type of trainer, a
Youngster.

YOUNGSTER $165
Rattata, level 11- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (133 EXP.)
Ekans, level 11- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (145 EXP.)

	Remember, use Antidote if you get poisoned by Ekans or
switch out Pokemon.  Continue on to the right to fight another
Lass and a Bug Catcher.

LASS $150
Rattata, level 10- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (121 EXP.)
Nidoran(m), level 10- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack (127 EXP.)

BUG CATCHER $90
Weedle, level 9- Poison Sting, String Shot (99 EXP.)
Kakuna, level 9- Harden (136 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 9- Tackle, String Shot (102 EXP.)
Metapod, level 9- Harden (138 EXP.)

	Hop down the small rocks south to fight another Youngster.

YOUNGSTER $210
Spearow, level 14- Peck, Growl, Leer (174 EXP.)

	Now hop down and back up around to the right to fight
another Bug Catcher.

BUG CATCHER $110
Caterpie, level 11- Tackle, String Shot (124 EXP.)
Metapod, level 11- Harden (169 EXP.)

	Finally, hop down to the big patch of grass and challenge
the Lass to the right.

LASS $210
Jigglypuff, level 14- Sing, Pound, Disable (228 EXP.)


	Now here's a Pokemon you haven't seen before!  Don't worry,
it doesn't have a lot of power, but its Sing attack puts you to
sleep, which is annoying.  After defeating her, you've wrapped
up all the trainers on this route and you can start searching in
the grass for some new Pokemon.

ROUTE 3 Wild Pokemon
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B)
Rattata- Common (Y)
Spearow- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Sandshrew- Rare (Y)
Mankey- Common (Y)
Jigglypuff- Rare (R,B)

	The biggest draw obviously here is Jigglypuff, a Pokemon
you can't get anywhere else in Red/Blue.  It doesn't appear here in
Yellow, but it does in a later route.  You may have to spend
some time looking for it, but it will be well worth the wait as a
valuable addition to your Pokedex.  Jigglypuff learns lots of
different TMs and HMs, but its biggest use should probably be
Sing.  If you need to capture a new Pokemon, put Jiggly out and
use Sing to put the wild Pokemon to sleep and make it easier to
catch.
	Sandshrew ironically appears on this route in Yellow, but
you can also capture it on the other side of Mt. Moon as well,
where it is more common.
	Moving on up the route, you should eventually reach a Poke
Center right before the cave; take the opportunity to heal up
before you enter the cave.  There's a man here who is willing to
sell you a Magikarp for $500, but don't accept the offer unless
you want to immediately start training one into a Gyarados for
your team.  Magikarp will be very easy to catch later on,
though. After catching Jigglypuff, enter the cave next to the Center
known as Mt. Moon and make sure you have some Poke Balls.  Mt.
Moon is also a cave with diverse trainers that will challenge
your team.  Be well-prepared!

MT. MOON (all floors) Wild Pokemon
Zubat- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Clefairy- Rare (R,B,Y)
Paras- Common (R,B,Y)
Geodude- Common (R,B,Y)
	Mt. Moon is a cave with diverse trainers that will
challenge
your team.  Be well-prepared!

	All new Pokemon here!  Zubat, an annoying Poison/Flying-
type, is constantly infesting the halls of Mt. Moon, so it
should be easy to capture one.  Pikachu can easily blast them away, but
Bulbasaur/Ivysaur will have problems against them.  Geodude, the
Rock/Ground type, can be difficult to catch (this is where Sing

comes in handy), Paras, the Bug/Grass-type, is also common, and
a good pick-up for Charmander teams against the upcoming gym, and
Clefairy is rare like Jigglypuff, so it may take some searching
around to find one; and, like Jigglypuff, it's useful because it
learns lots of TMs and HMs.  Mt. Moon is a moderately long
tunnel, and you should retreat back to the Poke Center if your
Pokemon become too injured. Walk north and challenge the Lass
next to the sign.

LASS
Clefairy, level 14- Pound, Growl, Sing (204 EXP.)

	This match is similar to the previous Lass; get past Sing
and it's a piece of cake.  Walk to the left and challenge the
trainer above you.

BUG CATCHER $110
Weedle, level 11- Poison Sting, String Shot (121 EXP.)
Kakuna, level 11- Harden (166 EXP.)

	Grab the POTION northwest of the trainer, then get TM12:
Water Gun directly south of here.  Go back right and past the
Lass, and to the northeast you should see a ladder.  Take it
down, follow the path down and to the left and down another
ladder.  You should see a trainer type you haven't seen before.
Challenge him!

ROCKET $330
Sandshrew, level 11- Scratch, Sand-Attack (219 EXP.)
Rattata, level 11- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (133 EXP.)
Zubat, level 11- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic (126 EXP.)

	This is your first encounter with a Team Rocket trainer;
they're a little bit tougher than the average trainer. You will
learn more about them later.  To the right on a raised platform
is an HP UP; give it to your favorite Pokemon or the one with
the least HP.
	Return back upstairs.  As you can see, the path branches up
and down; you can go up right away, but you'll be missing out on
a couple trainers and items, so go down.

SUPER NERD $275
Magnemite, level 11- Tackle (208 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 11- Tackle, Screech (241 EXP.)

	Electric Pokemon you haven't seen before!  Use Special
Attacks on Magnemite because it has superb Defense, and take
down Voltorb with whatever tactics you want.  Southwest of the Super
Nerd is a POTION.  Now go around the big slab of rock and
challenge the other trainer.

BUG CATCHER $100
Caterpie, level 10- Tackle, String Shot (112 EXP.)
Metapod, level 10- Harden (153 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 10- Tackle, String Shot (112 EXP.)

	Southeast of the Bug Catcher is a Rare Candy!  These are
items which automatically raise one of your Pokemon's levels by
one, but the stat increase won't be as great as if you had
leveled that Pokemon up by experience.  Use at your own risk,
but in-game, one or two Rare Candies for a Pokemon shouldn't hurt.
	North of the Rare Candy is an Escape Rope.  Continue north
until you see the northern wall.  Fight the trainer that you
see.

LASS $165
Oddish, level 11- Absorb (183 EXP.)
Bellsprout, level 11- Vine Whip, Growth (198 EXP.)

	Grass Pokemon here.  Oddish is similar to Zubat in its
ability to suck health away, but Bellsprout is nothing special.
Keep going left, then go south and take the ladder down.  On the
connecting floor, take the next ladder down, and fight another
Rocket on the bottom floor.

ROCKET $360
Zubat, level 12- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic (138 EXP.)
Ekans, level 12- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (159 EXP.)

	And take the item, above the Rocket, which is TM01: Mega
Punch!  It's a good move to teach an Attack- strong Pokemon like
Mankey early in the game.  Also, check out the weird rock to the
right to get an ETHER, an item that replenishes the PP of one of
your Pokemon's moves.
	Return to the top floor and go west to challenge the next
trainer.

YOUNGSTER $150
Rattata, level 10- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (121 EXP.)
Rattata, level 10- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (121 EXP.)
Zubat, level 10- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic (115 EXP.)

	This Youngster annoys you with Quick Attack and Leech Life;
you may have to go back and visit the Center after this bout.
When you can, continue on and north to encounter a new trainer,
a Hiker.

HIKER $350
Geodude, level 10- Tackle (183 EXP.)
Geodude, level 10- Tackle (183 EXP.)
Onix, level 10- Tackle, Screech (231 EXP.)

	As you can see, Hikers generally prefer Rock-types.  You
should see a ladder, but don't go down yet!  Northwest of the
ladder is a Moon Stone; be sure to grab it.  Moon Stones are
very important items that evolve only certain Pokemon.  Here are the
list of Pokemon that evolve by Moon Stone:

Nidorino (evolution of Nidoran(m))
Nidorina (evolution of Nidoran(f))
Clefairy
Jigglypuff

	There are also only four in the game, so if you want to
complete your Pokedex, hang onto them!  Now take the ladder
down, and take the successive ladder down to the southeast from there.
	Now on the bottom again, you should see yet another Rocket
to challenge.

ROCKET $480
Red/Blue:
Raticate, level 16- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang
(397 EXP.)
Yellow:
Rattata, level 13- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (157 EXP.)
Zubat, level 13- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic (150 EXP.)

	Watch out for this Raticate's Hyper Fang!  It does a lot of
damage.  After disposing of it, start going along the long
outside perimeter right, down, left, then up.  Near the end,
another Rocket approaches you.  In Yellow version this Rocket
isn't there and is switched with the Rocket right before the
trainer with the fossils.

ROCKET $390
Red/Blue:
Rattata, level 13- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (157 EXP.)
Zubat, level 13- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic (150 EXP.)

	Almost there!  Go up a little bit and locate the narrow
path leading right.  Walk down it and press A at the dead end to get
another Moon Stone!  Now go up and fight the trainer protecting
two valuable fossils.

SUPER NERD $300
Grimer, level 12- Pound, Disable (231 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 12- Tackle, Screech (264 EXP.)
Koffing, level 12- Tackle, Smog (292 EXP.)

	Don't left Super Nerd mess up your Pokemon with Disable and
Smog!  After defeating him, you have a choice from one of two
fossils.  Both of them contain a Pokemon that will hatch from
the fossil much later on in the game.  The right one contains a
Helix Fossil which creates an Omanyte and the left one contains a Dome
Fossil which creates a Kabuto.  It's your choice.
	If you're in Red/Blue, congratulations, all you have to do
is follow the path ahead of the Super Nerd and down the two
ladders to exit Mt. Moon!  If you're Yellow, however, if you try
to escape, one more Rocket will ambush you (they may look
familiar).

ROCKET $420
Ekans, level 14- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (186 EXP.)
Meowth, level 14- Scratch, Growl, Bite (207 EXP.)
Koffing, level 14- Tackle, Smog (342 EXP.)

	Yes, it's Jessie and James from the TV show!  Looks like
they took the Super Nerd's fossil and now are out to steal
yours. Show them who they're dealing with!  This shouldn't be difficult
unless your Pokemon are very low on energy, since their Pokemon
don't know good moves yet.  After defeating them, you're free to
head down the two ladders and exit Mt. Moon.
	Outside of Mt. Moon is Route 4.  There isn't much here, so
just head right, go up the small ledge and grab TM04: Whirlwind
if you want (it's pretty useless) and hop down the ledge to
where the grass area is.  You probably need to head right to Cerulean
City first and heal at the Poke Center before anything else, but
when you're done, check out this patch of grass to look for new
Pokemon.

ROUTE 4 Wild Pokemon
Land:
Rattata- Very Common (R,B), Common (Y)
Spearow- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Ekans- Common (R)
Sandshrew- Common (B,Y)
Mankey- Very Common (Y)
Water:

Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	This is one of the only routes where you can catch a wild
Ekans!  So if you're playing the Red version, be sure to grab
that, and if you're playing Blue or Yellow, capture a Sandshrew
and consider making it a part of your team!  It's a great
Ground-type that rivals Diglett in team strength.  It also learns Slash
at level 17, so it can become very useful very quickly.  There
shouldn't be any other Pokemon you need, so now head east to
Cerulean City.

CERULEAN CITY Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Poliwag- Common (R,B,Y)
Poliwhirl- Rare (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	After healing in the local Center, check out the city.  In
the very southwest is a Bike Shop, but the bikes there cost
$1,000,000!  Considering the fact that you'll never get that
kind of money, you'll have to hold off on buying a bike for now.  To
the east of the Bike Shop is the local Poke Mart.

Cerulean City Poke Mart:
Poke Ball -$200
Potion -$300
Repel -$350
Antidote -$100
Burn Heal -$250
Awakening -$200
Parlyz Heal -$200

	You may want to get a Repel or two, in case you need to
make a quick escape from a Route when all your Pokemon are almost
fainted.  Directly left of the Poke Center is a house where a
man will offer to trade his Jynx for your Poliwhirl in the Red/Blue
versions.  You don't have a Poliwhirl yet, but they're not very
hard to get; make sure to get one as soon as you are able.  In
the Yellow version, this house contains a girl that takes care
of orphaned Pokemon.  She gives you a Bulbasaur!  Bulbasaur is a
great supporting Pokemon to use in your party, but you'll have
to train it up a bit first, since you get it at level 10.
	Finally, there is a house in the northwest holding a man
that tells you the secrets of all the badges.  It's pretty
interesting information and you should hear him out if you're
new to the world of Pokemon.  Also, check out the small area behind
his house.  Keep pressing A at random tiles and you'll find a
RARE CANDY!  Now it's time to take on the Cerulean City gym.

CERULEAN CITY GYM
Style: Water

CERULEAN CITY GYM Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B)

	You've made it to your second gym; this one has trainers
using Water-types.  Look at your Pokemon's levels; they should
be at least level 20-22 by now, or else you could have trouble with
the leader, Misty.  If they're underleveled, you may want to
explore routes 24-25 north of Cerulean before challenging the
gym.
	Ivysaur and Pikachu can easily take this gym by themselves,
but any Charmander or Squirtle team has their work cut out for
them!  There haven't been many opportunities to catch Grass
Pokemon to fight Misty, so your supporting Pokemon will just
have to gut it out move-for-move with them.
	Advance forward to fight the first trainer, a Swimmer.  You can
avoid him by taking the long path, but no sense on wimping out
on the worst trainer of the gym...

SWIMMER $80
Horsea, level 16- Bubble (283 EXP.)
Shellder, level 16- Tackle, Withdraw (331 EXP.)

	Not much strategy here; Horsea uses a weak Bubble attack
only and Shellder uses Withdraw to raise Defense then Tackle.
Walk up the path toward Misty and a second trainer should
advance to challenge you.

JR. TRAINER(f) $380
Goldeen, level 19- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic (451 EXP.)

	Don't be afraid to battle Goldeen; it doesn't have any
Water attacks!  Be sure to switch out if it uses Supersonic though;
confusion is a dangerous status ailment.  Once you've finished
it off, save your game and battle the Gym Leader.

GYM LEADER Misty (uses X Defend) $2079, TM11:Bubblebeam, Cascade Badge
Red/Blue:
Staryu, level 18- Tackle, Water Gun (408 EXP.)
Starmie, level 21- Tackle, Water Gun, Bubblebeam (931 EXP.)
Yellow:
Staryu, level 18- Tackle, Water Gun (408 EXP.)
Starmie, level 21- Tackle, Water Gun, Harden, Bubblebeam (931 EXP.)

	Misty says she's an all-out Water attacker, but that's not
quite true.  For one thing, she likes to use X Defend a lot to
increase her Pokemon's Defense, and in Yellow, her Starmie
picked up Harden.
	She sends out Staryu first, the weaker of her two Pokemon.
You should be able to knock it out using any Pokemon you want
except Charmeleon.  Starmie, however, is a behemoth at level 21.
It has terrific defenses and a very powerful Water attack called
Bubblebeam.  Ivysaur has the easiest time against it because
it's resistant to Water and Grass attacks are super-effective against
it.  In Yellow, weaken Starmie with a supporting Pokemon, then
switch and let Pikachu finish it off with Thundershock.  If
you're using a Wartortle, you could try to outlast Starmie by
using Normal attacks and healing with Potion, but Charmeleon
teams will have a very tough time and have to rely, yet again,
on supporting Pokemon.  If you have a Butterfree, put it to sleep
then attack it as much as you can.  If not, you will have to
hope either your Mankey or Paras if you picked one up can wear it
out. This is probably the toughest gym battle for Charmander teams.
	But after you defeat her, you get lots of experience, cash,
the Cascade badge, and TM11: Bubblebeam.  If you have Wartortle,
give that TM to it.  You now have two badges.  On to the next
gym!



_________________________________________________________________
	4. Thunder Badge
	The first thing you should do is head to the route north of
Cerulean City.  Suddenly, Gary appears out of nowhere to
challenge you!

RIVAL Gary $595
Red/Blue:
Pidgeotto, level 18- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (435 EXP.)
Abra, level 15- Teleport (234 EXP.)
Rattata, level 15- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (183 EXP.)
Squirtle, level 17- Tackle, Tail Whip, Bubble, Water Gun (238 EXP.)
OR Bulbasaur, level 17- Tackle, Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip (241 EXP.)
OR Charmander, level 17- Scratch, Growl, Ember, Leer (235 EXP.)
Yellow:
Spearow, level 18- Peck, Growl, Leer, Fury Attack (223 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 15- Scratch, Sand-Attack (298 EXP.)
Rattata, level 15- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (183 EXP.)
Eevee, level 17- Tackle, Tail Whip, Sand-Attack (334 EXP.)

	In Red and Blue, Gary has made some changes to his team.
He evolved his Pidgey into Pidgeotto, and it's the hardest Pokemon
to defeat of his, but after Misty, it's a walk in the park.
Just remember to switch if your Pokemon are hazed out too much by
Sand-Attack.  Abra is helpless because it only knows Teleport,
Rattata is the same as always except with Hyper Fang, and Gary
hasn't evolved his starter Pokemon yet.  The starters now all
know an elemental move, so you may still want to use someone
other than your starter against them.
	In Yellow, Gary has added Sandshrew and Rattata.  Spearow
can be flattened with Pikachu, use your Mankey/Butterfree/other
against Sandshrew, Rattata is the same as R/B, and Eevee has
only learned Sand-Attack, making it pretty easy to defeat.
	After making quick work of Gary, it's time to take on the
Nugget Bridge north of Cerulean on Route 24.  Defeat all five of
the trainers in a row to get a special prize!  Here are the
trainers (you may need a couple Antidotes):

BUG CATCHER $140
Caterpie, level 14- Tackle, String Shot (159 EXP.)
Weedle, level 14- Poison Sting, String Shot (156 EXP.)

LASS $210
Red/Blue:
Pidgey, level 14- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (165 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 14- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting (177 EXP.)
Yellow:
Pidgey, level 14- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (165 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 14- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick (177 EXP.)

YOUNGSTER $210
Rattata, level 14- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (171 EXP.)
Ekans, level 14- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (186 EXP.)
Zubat, level 14- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic (162 EXP.)

LASS $240
Red/Blue:
Pidgey, level 16- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (187 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 16- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting (201 EXP.)
Yellow:
Pidgey, level 16- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (187 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 16- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick (201 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(m) $360
Red/Blue:
Mankey, level 18- Scratch, Leer, Karate Chop (285 EXP.)
Yellow:
Mankey, level 18- Scratch, Leer, Low Kick, Karate Chop (285 EXP.)

	After defeating the five, talk to the man at the end to get
a NUGGET.  Turns out this Nugget Bridge group is a small group
of Team Rocket's, and you have one more fight.

ROCKET $450
Ekans, level 15- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (198 EXP.)
Zubat, level 15- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic, Bite (172 EXP.)

	He's just an underling, so he should be no problem.  Heal
back up at the Cerulean Poke Center, and sell that Nugget at the
Poke Mart for $5000!
	Now go on a little past Nugget Bridge and in the northwest
plateau there should be something there.  Not only is here TM45:
Thunder Wave, but in Yellow, there is a trainer who will give
you a Charmander!  South of here is another trainer and a patch of
grass to look for Pokemon in.

JR. TRAINER(m) $280
Rattata, level 14- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (171 EXP.)
Ekans, level 14- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (186 EXP.)

	Look in the grass here to find lots of interesting Pokemon!

ROUTES 24 & 25 Wild Pokemon
Land:
Caterpie- Common (R,B)
Metapod- Very Common (R,B)
Weedle- Common (R,B)
Kakuna- Very Common (R,B)
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Rare (Y)
Oddish- Very Common (R,Y)
Bellsprout- Very Common (B,Y)
Venonat- Common (Y)
Abra- Common (R,B)
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	The main Pokemon you want to get here are Oddish (Red
version), Bellsprout (Blue version), both (Yellow version), Abra
(Red/Blue versions), and Venonat (Yellow version).  Abra isn't
here in Yellow on this route, but you will encounter it later
on. Abra is very difficult to catch because it always teleports away
when you encounter it.  The best way is to put it to sleep with
Butterfree or use the TM you just got on a compatible Pokemon to
paralyze it, then throw Poke Balls at it.  Otherwise, you may
have to just throw Poke Balls at it when you first find it and
cross your fingers.  You should also seriously consider making
Abra a part of your team.  Level it up by putting it first in
battle and then switching to a stronger Pokemon until it gets to
level 16 so it evolves, then it becomes a powerful Psychic
Pokemon for your team.
	Proceed east from Nugget Bride to Route 25, where you will
do battle against the trainers here.  The patch of grass left of
the first Hiker contains the same Pokemon from Route 24.
Challenge that Hiker first!

HIKER $525
Machop, level 15- Karate Chop (282 EXP.)
Geodude, level 15- Tackle, Defense Curl (276 EXP.)

	Machop is a Fighting-type similar to Mankey, and it's weak
to Flying and Psychic-types.  Go a little east to challenge the
Youngster.

YOUNGSTER $225
Rattata, level 15- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (183 EXP.)
Spearow, level 15- Peck, Growl, Leer, Fury Attack (186 EXP.)

	Directly south is another Hiker.

HIKER $595
Onix, level 17- Tackle, Screech, Bind (393 EXP.)

	A little northeast of the Hiker, challenge another
Youngster.

YOUNGSTER $255
Slowpoke, level 17- Confusion (360 EXP.)

	Slowpoke is an interesting Pokemon; it's part Water, part
Psychic.  Challenge the trainer directly below this Youngster.

LASS $225
Red/Blue:
Nidoran(m), level 15- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting (192 EXP.)

Nidoran(f), level 15- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting (189 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidoran(m), level 15- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack, Double Kick (192 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 15- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick (192 EXP.)

	...And directly east of the Lass is another Hiker!

HIKER $455
Geodude, level 13- Tackle, Defense Curl (238 EXP.)
Geodude, level 13- Tackle, Defense Curl (238 EXP.)
Machop, level 13- Karate Chop (244 EXP.)
Geodude, level 13- Tackle, Defense Curl (238 EXP.)

	Now there is an important item to the north, but in order
to get to it now, you have to get the trainer north to walk out of
the way.  So if you're one square north of the Hiker you just
fought, take one step east and north for the north trainer to
challenge you and clear the way to the item.

JR. TRAINER(m) $280
Rattata, level 14- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (171 EXP.)
Ekans, level 14- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (186 EXP.)

	Now walk north into the small grove to get TM19: Seismic
Toss!  This is another useful item near the beginning of the
adventure that always does a set damage to the opposing Pokemon.
Now head back out and east to fight the next trainer.

YOUNGSTER $210
Ekans, level 14- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting (186 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 14- Scratch, Sand-Attack (279 EXP.)

	Go east a little bit to fight the last trainer of this
route.

LASS $195
Oddish, level 13- Absorb (216 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 13- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (153 EXP.)
Oddish, level 13- Absorb (216 EXP.)

	You've cleared all the trainers on this route now, so head
a little bit more east to get to your destination, Bill's cottage.
You should have heard Gary talk about him a little bit after you
beat him; Bill is one of the chief authorities on Pokemon out
there.  Unfortunately when you meet him at his cottage, he's in
a little trouble!  Looks like he messed up an experiment or too.
Just run the Teleport Ignition Separator when he tells you to,
though, and he'll be back to normal (in Yellow, Pikachu goes
crazy through the whole scene).  Talk to him afterwards and
he'll give you a free ticket to board the S.S.ANNE near Vermilion
City.

	Exit the cottage and cross the bridge south, then take the
little shortcut back to Cerulean City.  When you get back, you
should notice that the house previously being guarded by a
police officer is now unguarded so you can go through.  It turns out a
Team Rocket member robbed this household of a precious item.
Take the back door out and challenge the Rocket to get that item
back!

ROCKET $510, TM28: Dig
Machop, level 17- Karate Chop (319 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 17- Pound, Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion (370 EXP.)

	That Drowzee can be a bit of a pain.  Don't let your
Pokemon be hypnotized, or else, you have to switch.  After beating him,
you get TM28: Dig!  This is a great Ground-type move that
not only deals a lot of damage in battle but has the ability to
work like in Escape Rope when a Pokemon uses it.  Teach it to
Sandshrew if you have one, or possibly Charmeleon.
	Time to exit Cerulean!  From where you beat the Rocket, go
down the path south.  To the east is another route, but it's
blocked by a tree you can't get past yet.  Head all the way
south to Route 5.

ROUTE 5 Wild Pokemon
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Common (Y)
Rattata- Very Common (Y)
Jigglypuff- Rare (Y)
Oddish- Common (R)
Bellsprout- Common (B)
Meowth- Common (B)

Mankey- Common- (R)
Abra- Very Common (Y)

	There are lots of version-exclusives here!  Oddish and
Mankey in Red version, and Bellsprout and Meowth in Blue
version; stock up here if you haven't already.  Meowth is another Pokemon
fit for battling in a competitive team.  And in Yellow, Abra and
Jigglypuff are finally catchable Pokemon (although at very low
levels)!
	At the bottom of the central-section of this rout, there is
a Daycare Man.  He can look after one of your Pokemon for
awhile, and it will raise its level over time.  The downsides are that
you can only do one at a time, and although your Pokemon will
level up, you can't select which moves it deletes, so you have
to be careful; also, they don't evolve in the Daycare Center.  The
upsides are that it doesn't take that long to level up the
weaker Pokemon (like Abra) at lower levels, and it's relatively cheap:
only $100 plus $100 more for every level your Pokemon gains.
Time in the Daycare Center is measured by the number of steps
you take; the lower-leveled and weaker the Pokemon, the less time it
takes to level it up.  You may want to give it a try; the best
way is to put Abra or Magikarp in (Pokemon that are tough to
train manually), and take them out right before they evolve:
that means take out Abra at level 15 and Magikarp at level 20.  Then
they will be one level away from their strong evolutions.
	At the very bottom of Route 5 there is a large building
connecting to Saffron City, but the guard won't let you pass.
Head through the Underground Pass to the east.  In the small
building there is a small girl that's willing to trade: In Red,
she'll trade you a Nidoran(f) for a Nidoran(m), in Blue, she'll
trade you a Nidoran(m) for a Nidoran(f), and in Yellow she'll

trade you a Machoke for a Cubone.  The Yellow version trade is
really valuable because when you trade, Machoke will
automatically evolve into a Machamp!  If you want a Fighting
Pokemon on your team, come back here after you catch a Cubone.
	Take the stairs down, and walk the long underground path
that exits out to Route 6, north of Vermilion and south of
Saffron.

ROUTE 6 Wild Pokemon
Land:
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Common (Y)
Rattata- Very Common (Y)
Jigglypuff- Rare (Y)
Oddish- Common (R)
Bellsprout- Common (B)
Meowth- Common (B)
Mankey- Common- (R)
Abra- Very Common (Y)
Water:
Psyduck- Common (Y)
Shellder- Common (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	Same Pokemon on land here as were in Route 5.  Go west to
challenge the first trainer on ths route.

BUG CATCHER $160
Weedle, level 16- Poison Sting, String Shot (177 EXP.)
Caterpie, level 16- Tackle, String Shot (181 EXP.)
Weedle, level 16- Poison Sting, String Shot (177 EXP.)

	Take on the couple to the southeast.

JR. TRAINER(m)
Red/Blue: $400
Squirtle, level 20- Tackle, Tail Whip, Bubble, Water Gun (282 EXP.)
Yellow: $320
Weepinbell, level 16- Vine Whip, Growth, Wrap, Poisonpowder (517 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f)
Red/Blue: $320
Rattata, level 16- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (195 EXP.)
Pikachu, level 16- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (280 EXP.)
Yellow: $400
Cubone, level 20- Growl, Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt (372 EXP.)

	Don't send your Pikachu out against that Cubone!  Go
southeast of them to another Bug Catcher.

BUG CATCHER $200
Red/Blue:
Butterfree, level 20- Confusion, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (685
EXP.)
Yellow:
Butterfree, level 20- Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder, Supersonic (685
EXP.)

	Be careful of status effects here!  Switch out if your lead
Pokemon gets put to sleep or paralyzed.  Fortunately for Yellow
players, this Bug Catcher's Butterfree doesn't know the
Confusion attack.
	Go southwest to take on the last two trainers of this
route.

JR. TRAINER(f) $320
Pidgey, level 16- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (187 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 16- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (187 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 16- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (187 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(m) $320
Spearow, level 16- Peck, Growl, Leer, Fury Attack (198 EXP.)
Raticate, level 16- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (397 EXP.)

	Head south to enter Vermilion City!  After healing at the
Poke Center, look around town a bit as always.  Check out the
Poke Mart first:

Vermilion City Poke Mart:
Poke Ball- $200
Super Potion- $700
Ice Heal- $250
Awakening- $200
Parlyz Heal- $200
Repel- $350

VERMILION CITY Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Shellder- Common (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	A new item available for purchase is Super Potion, which
heals 50 HP instead of just 20.  In the northwest corner of the
city, be sure to talk to the Fishing Guru inside there to get
OLD ROD!  Unfortunately, all it can catch are Magikarps, but now
you'll have all the time you need to get one.  Head to the
southern part of town.  In Red/Blue, the house slightly
northeast of the gym holds a trainer willing to trade a Spearow for a
Farfetch'd!  Make this trade as soon as you can to further your
Pokedex and get a rare Pokemon.  Also, check out the house
northwest of the gym.  Talk to the man in the black suit, the
Chairman.  Just listen to him blab on about his Rapidash for a
bit, and in all versions, he'll give you BIKE VOUCHER so you can
get a free bike at Cerulean!  Head back to that town whenever
you want to exchange the voucher for your bike; it really cuts down
traveling time.  You can't challenge the Vermilion gym yet
because it's closed off by a tree, so for now, head east from
the
city.
	You have three options as to where to go from here.  To the
far east is Route 11, full of wild Pokemon and trainers.
There's also the S.S.Anne, where you get HM01: Cut, and Diglett's Cave.
S.S.Anne is the only mandatory one, but if you want to complete
your Pokedex, you had better go through all three areas.  This
walkthrough assumes you're going through Route 11 first.

ROUTE 11 Wild Pokemon
Land:
Pidgey- Very Common (Y)
Pidgeotto- Rare (Y)
Rattata- Very Common (Y)
Raticate- Rare (Y)
Spearow- Very Common (R,B)
Ekans- Common (R)
Sandshrew- Common (B)
Drowzee- Common (R,B,Y)
Water:
Shellder- Common (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	Be sure to pick up a Drowzee.  Here are the trainers on
this route to battle and gain experience from:

YOUNGSTER $315
Ekans, level 21- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting, Bite (279 EXP.)

GAMBLER $1260
Poliwag, level 18- Bubble, Hypnosis (297 EXP.)
Horsea, level 18- Bubble (319 EXP.)

	Gamblers are a new type of trainer; they choose a random
type of Pokemon to use and hope it'll be super-effective against
your Pokemon.  They also give away a lot of cash, which is good.
Proceed to wipe the rest of the trainers' Pokemon off the face
of the earth.

YOUNGSTER $285
Sandshrew, level 19- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (378 EXP.)
Zubat, level 19- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic, Bite (219 EXP.)


YOUNGSTER $270
Red/Blue:
Nidoran(m), level 18- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting (231 EXP.)
Nidorino, level 18- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting (454 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidoran(m), level 18- Tackle, Horn Attack, Double Kick, Poison Sting (231 EXP.)
Nidorino, level 18- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack, Double Kick (454 EXP.)

GAMBLER $1260
Bellsprout, level 18- Growth, Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder (324 EXP.)
Oddish, level 18- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore (300 EXP.)

GAMBLER $1260
Growlithe, level 18- Bite, Roar, Ember (351 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 18- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack (243 EXP.)

ENGINEER $1050
Magnemite, level 21- Tackle, Sonicboom (400 EXP.)

ENGINEER $900
Magnemite, level 18- Tackle (342 EXP.)

Magnemite, level 18- Tackle (342 EXP.)
Magneton, level 18- Tackle (621 EXP.)

YOUNGSTER $255
Rattata, level 17- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (207 EXP.)
Rattata, level 17- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (207 EXP.)
Raticate, level 17- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (421 EXP.)

GAMBLER $1260
Voltorb, level 18- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom (396 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 18- Tackle (342 EXP.)

	Now if you try to go east of Route 11 past the guard house,
you'll find a giant Snorlax blocking the way.  In the guard
house, go up the stairs to find a couple of people.  One of them
is one of Professor Oak's aids; if you've collected 30 or more
kinds of Pokemon in your Pokedex, he will give you an
ITEMFINDER. This item can be used to find hidden objects lying on the
ground. The other person is a trainer; In Red, he'll trade you a
Nidorina for a Nidorino, in Blue, Nidorino for Nidorina, and in Yellow,
trade a Dugtrio to him to get a Lickitung, the only place you
can get one in that version!  Be sure to catch in extra Dugtrio for
this purpose in case you plan to make one a part of your team.
	You're finished with this route, so now head west to
Diglett's Cave.  It shouldn't be very hard to find; it's just
the cave directly west of Route 11.

DIGLETT'S CAVE Wild Pokemon
Diglett- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Dugtrio- Rare (R,B,Y)

	Diglett and Dugtrio are the only inhabitants of this small
tunnel, so catch 'em!  Dugtrio, if you can find one, makes a
great choice for a team because it learns Dig and Slash, and
could fill that Ground-type spot to use against the next gym
leader if you don't have a Sandshrew.  You can usually find them
between levels 29 and 31 here.  Unfortunately they're very hard
to catch, so buy plenty of Poke Balls beforehand!  Diglett's
Cave is also very good for training Pokemon at this stage of the
game, so if you have any that are lagging behind in levels, each
Diglett gives off an average of 200 EXP.
	In order to access the secret areas beyond Diglett's Cave,
you need Cut, so it's best just to leave now and head for the
S.S.Anne.  The docking bay is directly east of Vermilion; just
go down the boardwalk and flash your ticket to board the ship!
	The object of your journey in the S.S.Anne is to get HM01:
Cut, but there are plenty of trainers restless to battle in
here, so don't miss out on the opportunity to gain lots of experience.
From the entrance of the ship, take the door directly south and
slightly right.  Challenge the old man here to a battle.

GENTLEMAN $1260
Growlithe, level 18- Bite, Roar, Ember (351 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 18- Bite, Roar, Ember (351 EXP.)

	Growlithe is one of the first Fire-types you'll fight; just
don't use a weak Grass-type against it and you'll do fine.  Exit
this room and go right and down, then take the stairs.  Enter
the first door from the left and grab the MAX POTION.  The next room
to the left contains two Sailors.


SAILOR $510
Horsea, level 17- Bubble (301 EXP.)
Shellder, level 17- Tackle, Withdraw (352 EXP.)
Tentacool, level 17- Acid, Supersonic, Wrap (382 EXP.)

SAILOR $630
Shellder, level 21- Tackle, Withdraw, Supersonic (436 EXP.)

	Sailors generally use Water and Fighting-type Pokemon.  The
room to the left of this one has another Sailor.

SAILOR $510
Horsea, level 17- Bubble (301 EXP.)
Horsea, level 17- Bubble (301 EXP.)
Horsea, level 17- Bubble (301 EXP.)

	The item in this room is an ETHER.  Take the next door to
the left to fight another Sailor.

SAILOR $540
Tentacool, level 18- Acid, Supersonic, Wrap, Poison Sting (405
 EXP.)
Staryu, level 18- Tackle, Water Gun (408 EXP.)

	Remember, Tentacool are part Poison as well as Water, so
they're weak against Ground and Psychic-type attacks.  You can
get TM44:Rest in this room!  Rest is a move that automatically
completely heals your Pokemon but puts it to sleep for a few
turns.  Put in on a good defensive Pokemon.  The last room to
the left holds two more trainers.

FISHERMAN $595
Tentacool, level 17- Acid, Supersonic, Wrap (382 EXP.)
Staryu, level 17- Tackle, Water Gun (385 EXP.)
Shellder, level 17- Tackle, Withdraw (352 EXP.)

SAILOR $600
Machop, level 20- Karate Chop, Low Kick (376 EXP.)

	There's nothing more on this floor of the ship, so head
back right and up the staircase, then back below the entrance.  Take
the door directly southeast of the entrance to fight another
trainer.

GENTLEMAN $1330
Red/Blue:
Nidoran(m), level 19- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting (243 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 19- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting (240 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidoran(m), level 19- Tackle, Horn Attack, Double kick, Poison Sting (243 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 19- Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick, Poison Sting (240 EXP.)

	The next two rooms to the left contain just tourists, but
in the third one there is a group that'll challenge you to a couple
battles.

LASS $270
Red/Blue:
Pidgey, level 18- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (211 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 18- Growl, Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting (226 EXP.)
Yellow:
Pidgey, level 18- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (211 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 18- Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick, Poison Sting (226 EXP.)

YOUNGSTER $315
Red/Blue:
Nidoran(m), level 21- Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Focus Energy (270 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidoran(m), level 21- Tackle, Horn Attack, Double Kick, Poison Sting (270 EXP.)

	And be sure to grab the item in here, TM08: Body Slam!
It's a very useful physical attack many Pokemon can use that has a
possibility of paralyzing the opponent when it hits.  The room
left of here just has an investigator, so pass it on.  At the
very left edge of the ship, first go down past the staircase to
find the kitchen.  The only reason you want to be here is for an
item.  Go to the right side of the room where the chefs are
peeling potatoes, and press A facing the bottom trash can to
find a GREAT BALL!  Great Balls are like Poke Balls but are more
consistent in capturing Pokemon.  If you haven't caught a
Dugtrio yet, this could really aid you well.
	Head back out of the kitchen and go north to head
downstairs.  Go down and take another flight of stairs, then
head all the way left out of this long room to reach the outside deck
of the ship.  Talk to everyone here to challenge a couple of
them.

SAILOR $510
Machop, level 17- Karate Chop (319 EXP.)
Tentacool, level 17- Acid, Supersonic, Wrap (382 EXP.)

SAILOR $540
Machop, level 18- Karate Chop (339 EXP.)
Shellder, level 18- Tackle, Withdraw, Supersonic (373 EXP.)

	That's all there is on this part of the ship, so head back
and through the long room to the right.  In this hallway, enter
the first room on the right and a man will show you a pic of a
big fat Pokemon he saw.  The room to the right of this one holds
two more trainers.

FISHERMAN $595
Goldeen, level 17- Peck, Tail Whip (403 EXP.)
Tentacool, level 17- Acid, Supersonic, Wrap (382 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 17- Peck, Tail Whip (403 EXP.)

GENTLEMAN
Red/Blue: $1610
Pikachu, level 23- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (403 EXP.)
Yellow: $1540
Voltorb, level 22- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct (484 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 22- Tackle, Sonicboom (418 EXP.)

	Watch out for the self-destructing Voltorb in Yellow!  Grab
the MAX ETHER in this room.  The people in the next room won't
challenge you, but the people in the room after them will!

GENTLEMAN $1190
Growlithe, level 17- Bite, Roar (331 EXP.)
Ponyta, level 17- Ember (553 EXP.)

LASS
Red/Blue: $270
Rattata, level 18- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (219 EXP.)
Pikachu, level 18- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (315 EXP.)
Yellow: $300
Jigglypuff, level 20- Sing, Pound, Disable, Defense Curl (325 EXP.)

	The item in this room is another Rare Candy!  Use it if you
wish to.  The last two rooms to the right just contain nice
trainers, no challengers, so continue on past to the captain's
ward.  Before you get to the stairs, however, out pops Gary!
Looks like he wants to redeem himself, so prepare for another
duel.  He's caught 40 Pokemon already!  Are you keeping pace?

RIVAL Gary $1300
Red/Blue:
Pidgeotto, level 19- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (459 EXP.)
Raticate, level 16- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (397 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 18- Teleport, Confusion (558 EXP.)
Wartortle, level 20- Tackle, Tail Whip, Bubble, Water Gun (616 EXP.)
OR Ivysaur, level 20- Tackle, Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip (625 EXP.)
OR Charmeleon, level 20- Scratch, Growl, Ember, Leer (607 EXP.)
Yellow:
Spearow, level 19- Peck, Growl, Leer, Fury Attack (235 EXP.)
Rattata, level 16- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (195 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 18- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (358 EXP.)
Eevee, level 20- Tackle, Tail Whip, Sand-Attack, Growl (393 EXP.)

	In Red/Blue, Gary has evolved the rest of his Pokemon, so
his team may actually be pretty tough to defeat.  Pidgeotto
leads off again, using Sand-Attack to try to reduce your accuracy.
Raticate still knows Hyper Fang, and the starters all have the
same moves as the previous battle.  The biggest advancement for
Gary this time around is his Abra evolution; Kadabra knows
Confusion, so make sure you don't use a Psychic-weak Pokemon
against it.  Overall, though, this should be much easier than
the battle near Cerulean, because he has seriously underleveled his
Pokemon at this point and you've gotten plenty more experience.
	In Yellow, he's even easier.  He has the exact same Pokemon
as before, so it appears that all he's been doing during the
time between this and the last battle is catching Pokemon. His
Sandshrew is the only real threat with the Slash attack.  He'll
start to build his team around his starter after this fight.
	After taking Gary out again, go down the stairs he was
blocking to find the captain's cabin.  It appears he's seasick,
but all you have to do is "rub-rub" his back, and he's all
healthy again.  As a reward for "curing" him, he gives you HM01:
Cut!  This is the first HM you have received so far, so it's
important to understand it.  HMs are like regular TMs, except
you can only use a TM once, they can be used outside battle for
special purposes, and they can be deleted.  HMs, however, can be
used as many times as you want and outside battles for special
purposes, but they cannot be deleted.  If you teach a Pokemon an
HM, it's stuck with that move forever.  Thus, since Cut is not a
particularly strong move, it's best not to teach it to one of
your fighting Pokemon, but instead a Grass-type you've caught
along the way so far.  Keep a designated Pokemon like Oddish
around in your party to keep Cut available.
	There's nothing more to do on the ship, so make your way
out.   The S.S.Anne departs Vermilion, and it won't come back
during the game.  You're almost ready for Vermilion gym!  The
last thing to do is to explore the area outside the other end of
Diglett; now fully available since you have Cut.
	So head back through Diglett's Cave and out the other side,
where you will find yourself back on Route 2, on the side you
couldn't get to before.  To the left is a tree you can use Cut
on to access Pewter City, but right now you want to go south.
Enter the house there to find a trainer in the back who will make a
trade with you: In Red/Blue, give him Abra and he gives you Mr.
Mime; in Yellow, give him Clefairy for Mr. Mime.  This is the
only place in the game you can get a Mr. Mime, so give him an
extra Abra if you've got one!  Abra are found on Routes 24-25 in
Red/Blue, and Clefairy are found in Mt. Moon in Yellow.  Now
exit this house and use Cut on the tree below, then head farther
south to larger building.  In there is one of Professor Oak's aides
who will give you HM05: Flash if you've caught at least 10 kinds of
Pokemon.  Flash isn't completely necessary to get through the
game, but it's still helpful if it's your first or second time
through the game.  Finally, exit the building south to find a
couple of items: HP UP immediately south and a MOON STONE
farther down.  Remember, you need all the Moon Stones to complete your
Pokedex!
	At last, you are ready to challenge the Vermilion City gym!
Return through Route 2 and Diglett Cave, and use Cut on the tree
blocking the gym to access it.

VERMILION CITY GYM
Style: Electric
	The Vermilion City gym is home of Electric-type trainers,
hence the absolute best type to use against this gym is Ground
because they are completely immune to Electric.  Use Sandslash
or Dugtrio to sweep through this gym; if you didn't pick either of
them up, then it will be more of a challenge.  Those who started
with Bulbasaur again have the easiest time, because Grass is
resistant against Electric.  If you chose Squirtle,
unfortunately you won't be able to use him much here!  This is
the first gym where Charmander starters don't get a disadvantage.
	Before you challenge the gym leader, Lt. Surge, take care
of the other three trainers first.

SAILOR
Red/Blue: $630
Pikachu, level 21- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (369 EXP.)
Pikachu, level 21- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (369 EXP.)
Yellow: $720
Magnemite, level 24- Tackle, Sonicboom (457 EXP.)

	I hate to say this, Yellow fans, but Pikachu isn't one of
the strongest Electric types.  It can paralyze you with Thunder
Wave, but it doesn't have the power of the others.

ROCKER $500
Red/Blue:
Voltorb, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom (441 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 20- Tackle (381 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom (441 EXP.)
Yellow:
Voltorb, level 20- Tackle Screech, Sonicboom (441 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 20- Tackle Screech, Sonicboom (441 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 20- Tackle Screech, Sonicboom (441 EXP.)

	Sonicboom is one of the most dangerous moves in the gym,
because it always does 20 HP damage.  Don't allow one of your
Pokemon to get caught up in too many of them.

GENTLEMAN
Red/Blue: $1610
Pikachu, level 23- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (403 EXP.)
Yellow: $1540
Voltorb, level 22- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct (484 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 22- Tackle, Sonicboom (418 EXP.)

	Now, Lt. Surge is protected by a door that won't open until
you locate the two switches in the trash cans littered
throughout the gym.  You have to find them both in a row; i.e., if you find
the first switch and then the next trash can you inspect doesn't
have the second switch, they reset.  The second switch is always
adjacent to the first.  To solve the puzzle, just keep looking
around in the trash cans until you find one of the switches,
then save your game, and look in all the adjacent trash cans,
resetting your game until you get it.  Once you hit both the
switches in a row, the doors open and you can challenge the gym
leader!

GYM LEADER Lt. Surge (uses X Speed) TM24:Thunderbolt, Thunder Badge
Red/Blue: $2376
Voltorb, level 21- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom (463 EXP.)
Pikachu, level 18- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (315 EXP.)
Raichu, level 24- Thundershock, Growl, Thunderbolt (627 EXP.)
Yellow: $2772
Raichu, level 28- Growl, Mega Punch, Mega Kick, Thunderbolt (732 EXP.)

	In Red/Blue, Lt. Surge's only hope of defending a Ground-
assault is his lead-off Voltorb using Sonicboom.  His strategy,
apart from that, is to weaken with Sonicboom, paralyze you with
Pikachu, and make an offensive assault with Raichu.  Now if you
have a Ground type, then Raichu is helpless; if you don't, he is
still defeatable.  Thunderbolt is a powerful Electric move, and
whatever you do, don't use Flying or Water-types against it!
Use strong physical attacks to take advantage of Raichu's low
Defense before it can knock out your Pokemon.  Unless your Pokemon are
4-5 levels above his, expect to go second in each round- his
Pokemon are fast.
	In Yellow, Raichu is Lt. Surge's only Pokemon!  This time
he has taught it Mega Punch and Mega Kick to use when his
Thunderbolt won't do the job.  Attack it in the same way by
using powerful physical attacks to take it down fast; of course, using
a Ground-type is an almost automatic victory even with Raichu's
new attacks.  If you want an added challenge, try beating Lt.
Surge's Raichu with just your Pikachu!

	When the battle is ended and you have won, collect the
Thunder Badge and TM24: Thunderbolt.  This is the best Electric
move in the game, so if you plan on getting an Electric-type for
your team eventually, hang on to it!




________________________________________________________________
	5. Rainbow Badge
	You have now reached the point of Pokemon Red/Blue/Yellow
where you need to seriously start thinking over the team you
eventually are going to use in the Pokemon League.  You have
three badges.  Look over the Pokemon encounters you've had in
the past and decide upon if you will make some changes to your team.
If you've been using a Raticate or a Butterfree as part of your
battling team, seriously consider letting that Pokemon go and
using one like Kadabra or Dugtrio instead.  You need to start
thinking about how your team works together; you should have at
least 3 or 4 Pokemon in your team right now, and they should all
be different types, not sharing any weaknesses (e.g., if 2 of
your 3 Pokemon have Psychic weakness, that's not good).  It's
not exactly wise to have 6 Pokemon as a team already; you want to
save a couple spots for later Pokemon as well, and you need
spots open for HM-using Pokemon.  Remember, you're nearing the
midpoint of the game, and it's time to start thinking about the hardest
challenges you'll face in the future!
	While still in Vermilion in the Yellow version, talk to the
Officer in the middle of the city.  Show her the Thunder Badge
and she lets you have your own Squirtle!  It's only at level 10,
though, so you'll have to train it hard to make it a part of
your team.
	It's now time to return to Cerulean.  Head north from
Vermilion, going from Route 6, through the Underground Path, and
Route 5 to reach the city.  Be sure to exchange your BIKE
VOUCHER for a Bicycle at the Bike Shop if you haven't yet!  It's not
necessary to complete the game, but it seriously cuts down on
traveling time.  And now that you have Cut, it's possible to
unblock that tree to the east of Cerulean.  Head east from the
tree to Route 9 and challenge the first trainer you see there!

JR. TRAINER(f) $360
Oddish, level 18- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore (300 EXP.)
Bellsprout, level 18- Growth, Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder (324 EXP.)
Oddish, level 18- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore (300 EXP.)
Bellsprout, level 18- Growth, Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep powder (324 EXP.)

	Lots of Grass here.  Perhaps you should purchase an
ANTIDOTE before you go any further.  Hop down two ledges from here to
collect TM30:Teleport.  This move works like an Escape Rope, but
if you already have Dig, you don't need this TM because it
doesn't do anything in battle.  Fight the nearby Hiker.

HIKER $700
Machop, level 20- Karate Chop, Low Kick (376 EXP.)
Onix, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Rock Throw (462 EXP.)

	Head right past the Hiker, up the ledge, then go all the
way to the lower-right portion of the route to fight another Hiker.

HIKER $735
Geodude, level 21- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (387 EXP.)
Onix, level 21- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Rock Throw (486 EXP.)

	Go back to the left and up two successive ledges to
challenge a different trainer next to a sign.  NOTE: In Yellow,
you might recognize this trainer from the TV show!

Red/Blue:
JR. TRAINER(m) $420
Growlithe, level 21- Bite, Roar, Ember (409 EXP.)
Charmander, level 21- Scratch, Growl, Ember, Leer (292 EXP.)
Yellow:
YOUNGSTER $360
Sandshrew, level 24- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash, Fissure (477 EXP.)

	North of him is a dedicated Bug Catcher.

BUG CATCHER $190
Beedrill, level 19- Fury Attack, Focus Energy (646 EXP.)
Beedrill, level 19- Fury Attack, Focus Energy (646 EXP.)

	To the left of the Bug Catcher is a big patch of grass to
catch Pokemon in.

ROUTE 9 Wild Pokemon
Rattata- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Raticate- Common (Y)
Spearow- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Fearow- Rare (Y)
Nidoran(f)- Very Common (Y)
Nidorina- Common (Y)
Nidoran(m)- Very Common (Y)
Nidorino- Common (Y)
Ekans- Common (R)
Sandshrew- Common(B)

	Raticate, Fearow, Nidorina, and Nidorino could be Pokemon
of interest if you want to speed up your Pokedex collection in
Yellow.  From the grass, head back east, down two ledges, then
east and up a ledge to fight another trainer.

BUG CATCHER $200
Red/Blue:
Caterpie, level 20- Tackle, String Shot (226 EXP.)
Weedle, level 20- Poison Sting, String Shot (222 EXP.)
Venonat, level 20- Tackle, Disable (321 EXP.)
Yellow:
Caterpie, level 20- Tackle, String Shot (226 EXP.)
Weedle, level 20- Poison Sting, String Shot (222 EXP.)
Venonat, level 20- Tackle, Disable, Confusion, Poisonpowder (321 EXP.)

	Up a shade and to the left to the next trainer.

JR. TRAINER(m) $380
Rattata, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (231 EXP.)
Diglett, level 19- Scratch, Growl, Dig (328 EXP.)
Ekans, level 19- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting, Bite (252 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 19- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (378 EXP.)

	There's a tiny patch of grass northeast, but there aren't
any new Pokemon.  Go back east and up the ledge above the Bug
Catcher to challenge the Hiker.

HIKER $700
Geodude, level 20- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw (367 EXP.)
Machop, level 20- Karate Chop, Low Kick (376 EXP.)
Geodude, level 20- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw (367 EXP.)

	Go east from him, and hop down the ledge for another fight.

JR. TRAINER(f) $460
Meowth, level 23- Scratch, Growl, Bite, Pay Day (339 EXP.)

	Now you can head east from her to Route 10 to investigate
the large grass patch to the right.

ROUTE 10 Wild Pokemon
Land:
Rattata- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Spearow- Very Common (R,B), Common (Y)
Nidoran(f)- Very Common (Y)
Nidoran(m)- Very Common (Y)
Ekans- Common (R)
Sandshrew- Common (B)
Machop- Rare (Y)
Magnemite- Common (Y)
Voltorb- Common (R,B)
Water:
Poliwag- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Poliwhirl- Common (R,B,Y)
Slowpoke- Very Common (R,B)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	The only real points of interest in these routs are the new
Electric-types.  In Red/Blue, look hard for the Voltorb, and in
Yellow, look hard for the Magnemite.  Don't worry; they are
eventually available in all versions.  The water path to the
north leads around to a different area, but you can't access it
yet; be sure to come back here after you learn Surf!  Head south
to the Poke Center and heal up to prepare for the long tunnel
ahead.  Go around the trees west of the Center and fight the
trainer right before the tunnel.

JR. TRAINER(f) $400
Red/Blue:
Pikachu, level 20- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (351 EXP.)
Clefairy, level 20- Pound, Growl, Sing, Doubleslap (291 EXP.)
Yellow:
Jigglypuff, level 20- Sing, Pound, Disable, Defense Curl (325 EXP.)
Clefairy, level 20- Pound, Growl, Sing, Doubleslap (291 EXP.)

	Enter the cave opening north to begin your trek through the
very long and treacherous Rock Tunnel.  Be prepared to fight a
lot of Rock and Ground-type Pokemon.

ROCK TUNNEL Wild Pokemon (all floors)
Zubat- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Machop- Common (R,B,Y)
Geodude- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Onix- Common (R,B), Common (Y, 2nd Basement and lower)

	There are a couple new obvious Pokemon here, namely Onix
and Machop.  Be sure to pick them up and decide whether or not you
want to add Machop to your party.  Rock Tunnel is also very
dark; it's possible to get through the tunnel without Flash but it's
difficult, so you'd do best to bring along an Electric Pokemon
to use Flash so you can see.  If you're using Pikachu, this could
be a tough cave for him!  Best to use your supporting Pokemon to
get through this cave instead.  Go southeast from the entrance to
find the first trainer here.

POKeMANIAC $1150
Red/Blue:
Cubone, level 23- Growl, Bone Club (427 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 23- Confusion, Disable, Headbutt (487 EXP.)
Yellow:
Cubone, level 23- Growl, Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt (427 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 23- Confusion, Disable, Headbutt (487 EXP.)

	This Pokemaniac uses a clever combination that cancels his
two Pokemon's weaknesses out, but a Grass-type can easily handle
them both.  Go east from the trainer, then north to take the
ladder down.  In this large room, head southwest to find the
path and be challenged again.

POKeMANIAC $1250
Slowpoke, level 25- Confusion, Disable, Headbutt (529 EXP.)

	Go left again and take the north path in the fork (the left
path just leads to a dead end) and you'll be attacked by another
trainer.

JR. TRAINER(f) $440
Oddish, level 22- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (367 EXP.)
Bulbasaur, level 22- Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder (301 EXP.)

	And northeast of her is another PokeManiac!

POKeMANIAC $1100
Red/Blue:
Charmander, level 22- Growl, Ember, Leer, Rage (306 EXP.)
Cubone, level 22- Growl, Bone Club (409 EXP.)
Yellow:
Charmander, level 22- Growl, Ember, Leer, Rage (306 EXP.)
Cubone, level 22- Growl, Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt (409 EXP.)

	Continue northeast along the path until you get to another
fork.  Go all the way north to challenge a trainer.

HIKER $700
Machop, level 20- Karate Chop, Low Kick (376 EXP.)
Onix, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Rock Throw (462 EXP.)

	Go around the slab of rock to the south to fight another
Hiker.

HIKER $875
Geodude, level 25- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (460 EXP.)

	Hiker's Geodude likes to bomb itself, so perhaps you should
save before challenging him in case one of your Pokemon gets
knocked out.  Take the ladder northwest of here to go down to
the second basement.  Another giant slab of rock!  Challenge the two
Hikers here.

HIKER $665
Geodude, level 19- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw (349 EXP.)
Machop, level 19- Karate Chop (357 EXP.)
Geodude, level 19- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw (349 EXP.)
Geodude, level 19- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw (349 EXP.)

HIKER $700
Onix, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Rock Throw (462 EXP.)
Onix, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Rock Throw (462 EXP.)
Geodude, level 20- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw (367 EXP.)

	Head east from here and challenge a third Hiker below the
next ladder.

HIKER $735
Geodude, level 21- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (387 EXP.)
Graveler, level 21- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (603 EXP.)

	Take the next ladder down above the Hiker.  Go directly
left to challenge a trainer on this floor.

JR. TRAINER(f) $420
Jigglypuff, level 21- Sing, Pound, Disable, Defense Curl (342 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 21- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (247 EXP.)
Meowth, level 21- Scratch, Growl, Bite, Pay Day (310 EXP.)

	Go straight left from her to challenge another Hiker.

HIKER $735
Geodude, level 21- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (387 EXP.)
Geodude, level 21- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (387 EXP.)
Graveler, level 21- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (603 EXP.)

	This is probably the toughest trainer so far, especially
since your Pokemon are tired out by now.  Remember to save when
you can and to use those leftover Potions you most likely have.
Go northwest from the Hiker to be challenged by a PokeManiac.

POKeMANIAC $1000
Slowpoke, level 20- Confusion, Disable (423 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 20- Confusion, Disable (423 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 20- Confusion, Disable (423 EXP.)

	Take the ladder down above the PokeManiac.  Almost there!
Challenge the two female trainers you see here first.

JR. TRAINER(f) $440
Bellsprout, level 22- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (396 EXP.)
Clefairy, level 22- Pound, Growl, Sing, Doubleslap (319 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $380
Pidgey, level 19- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (223 EXP.)
Rattata, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (231 EXP.)
Rattata, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (231 EXP.)
Bellsprout, level 19- Growth, Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep powder (342 EXP.)

	Follow the path straight left and challenge the final
trainer in Rock Tunnel.

JR. TRAINER(f) $400
Meowth, level 20- Scratch, Growl, Bite, Pay Day (295 EXP.)
Oddish, level 20- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (333 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 20- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (235 EXP.)

	Go left a tiny bit, then down past the sign to free
yourself from Rock Tunnel!  You're still not quite safe yet.
Now on the other side of Route 10, talk the girl right next
to the cave exit to challenge her.

JR. TRAINER(f) $420
Pidgey, level 21- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (247 EXP.)
Pidgeotto, level 21- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (508 EXP.)

	Head to the right from her and you should see a strange
bush; press A facing it to get a MAX ETHER.  Go back left past
her to fight a Hiker.

HIKER $735
Geodude, level 21- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw, Selfdestruct (387 EXP.)
Onix, level 21- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Rock Throw (486 EXP.)

	...And hop down the ledge below to challenge one more.

HIKER $665
Onix, level 19- Tackle, Screech, Bind, Rock Throw (439 EXP.)
Graveler, level 19- Tackle, Defense Curl, Rock Throw (544 EXP.)

	Head east to challenge the last trainer before entering the
town below.

POKeMANIAC $1000
Red/Blue:
Cubone, level 20- Growl, Bone Club (372 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 20- Confusion, Disable (423 EXP.)
Yellow:
Cubone, level 20- Growl, Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt (372 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 20- Confusion, Disable (423 EXP.)

	Congratulations, you've made it to Lavender Town!  Before
doing anything else, head straight to the Poke Center which I'm
sure you need to use.
	Lavender is a sad, sad town (it's the grave site of
deceased Pokemon).  If you go to the Pokemon Volunteer house in the
middle, you'll find that Mr. Fuji, leader of the club, isn't
there.  There is a Poke Mart in this town that finally sells
Great Balls!

Lavender Town Poke Mart:
Great Ball- $600
Super Potion- $700
Revive- $1500
Escape Rope- $550
Super Repel- $500
Antidote- $100
Burn Heal- $250
Ice Heal- $250
Parlyz Heal- $250

	Great Balls are more expensive than Poke Balls, but they
catch Pokemon with much greater consistency.  The house directly
south of the Volunteer House is the Name Rater.  This man will
change the nickname of your Pokemon if you want to.  Traded
Pokemon can't have their names changed if you're not the
Original Trainer of the Pokemon, however.
	The main draw of Lavender Town is the Pokemon Tower, the
place where all deceased Pokemon are laid to rest.  All the
Pokemon in the tower are ghosts though, and they can't be
revealed until you get the Silph Scope, so there's no point in
scaling the tower yet.  The route that goes south of Lavender
leads to Fuchsia, but you don't have the items to get through
that route either; instead, head west from Lavender to Route 8.
	There's a trainer directly southwest from the entrance;
challenge her first.

LASS $330
Clefairy, level 22- Pound, Growl, Sing, Doubleslap (319 EXP.)
Clefairy, level 22- Pound, Growl, Sing, Doubleslap (319 EXP.)

	And there's a trainer directly west of her.

GAMBLER $1680
Growlithe, level 24- Bite, Roar, Ember, Leer (468 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 24- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (324 EXP.)

	The Gamblers are back again!  There is a large patch of
grass behind a cuttable tree to the left, but take care of the
rest of the trainers around it first.  Challenge the Super Nerd
northwest of the Gambler.

SUPER NERD $550
Grimer, level 22- Pound, Disable (423 EXP.)
Muk, level 22- Pound, Disable (739 EXP.)
Grimer, level 22- Pound, Disable (423 EXP.)

	To the left of the Super Nerd are a group of four trainers,
all standing in a line.

LASS $345
Red/Blue:
Nidoran(f), level 23- Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting, Tail Whip (289 EXP.)
Nidorina, level 23- Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting, Tail Whip (576 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidoran(f), level 23- Scratch, Double Kick, Poison Sting, Tail Whip (289 EXP.)
Nidorina, level 23- Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick, Poison Sting (576 EXP.)

SUPER NERD $650
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)

LASS $360
Meowth, level 24- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (354 EXP.)
Meowth, level 24- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (354 EXP.)
Meowth, level 24- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (354 EXP.)

LASS $285
Red/Blue:
Pidgey, level 19- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (223 EXP.)
Rattata, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (231 EXP.)
Nidoran(m), level 19- Leer, Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting (243 EXP.)
Meowth, level 19- Scratch, Growl, Bite, Pay Day (280 EXP.)
Pikachu, level 19- Thundershock, Growl, Thunder Wave, Quick Attack (333 EXP.)
Yellow:
Pidgey, level 19- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (223 EXP.)
Rattata, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (231 EXP.)
Nidoran(f), level 19- Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick, Poison Sting (240 EXP.)
Meowth, level 19- Scratch, Growl, Bite, Pay Day (280 EXP.)
Nidoran(m), level 19- Tackle, Horn Attack, Double Kick, Poison Sting (243 EXP.)

	Now cut through the tree to look in the grasses of Route 8.

ROUTE 8 Wild Pokemon
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Rare (Y)
Rattata- Very Common (Y)
Ekans- Common (R)
Sandshrew- Common (B)
Vulpix- Common (B)
Jigglypuff- Common (Y)
Meowth- Very Common (B)
Mankey- Very Common (R)
Growlithe- Common (R)
Abra- Common (Y)
Kadabra- Rare (Y)

	In Red and Blue, this is the principal route of the
version-exclusive Pokemon!  Ekans, Vulpix (for the first time),
and Mankey in Red, and Sandshrew, Meowth, and Growlithe (for the
first time) in Blue.  Catch your new version exclusive Fire
Pokemon and you should be done here.  Vulpix and Growlithe can
greatly aid you in the next gym battle, by the way.  In Yellow,
Kadabra is catchable for the first time!  If you didn't bother
to train up an Abra from earlier, now is the perfect time to
capture its evolved form to make it one of your own.
	After that, continue west.  There's another guard house
like the one on Route 5 from before, the road's still closed.
Challenge the Gambler near the guard house.

GAMBLER $1540
Poliwag, level 22- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun (363 EXP.)
Poliwag, level 22- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun (363 EXP.)
Poliwhirl, level 22- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun (616 EXP.)

	And battle the trainer north of him.

SUPER NERD $500
Voltorb, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom (441 EXP.)
Koffing, level 20- Tackle, Smog (487 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 20- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom (441 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 20- Tackle (381 EXP.)

	North of the Super Nerd is another Underground Path, this
one leading from Route 8 to Route 7, which is right next to
Celadon City.

ROUTE 7 Wild Pokemon
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Rare (Y)
Rattata- Very Common (Y)
Oddish- Common (R)
Bellsprout- Common (B)
Vulpix- Common (B)
Jigglypuff- Common (Y)
Meowth- Very Common (B)
Mankey- Very Common (R)
Growlithe- Common (R)
Abra- Common (Y)
Kadabra- Rare (Y)

	The wild Pokemon here are pretty much the same as the
previous route, just with Oddish and Bellsprout substituting for
Ekans and Sandshrew.  Simply head up the ledge and to the left
to reach Celadon City!

CELADON CITY Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Poliwhirl- Common (R,B,Y)
Slowpoke- Common (R,B)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	Celadon is a really big city, home of many events and
things to do.  First thing you should probably do is check out the
Poke Center close to the entrance.  After that, exit the Center and
to the left, you should see a narrow path leading up between the
Center and some trees.  Take that path up, behind the houses and
to the left.  Go up another opening, and you should see a back
entrance to a big building.  Enter, climb the three flights of
stairs and enter the little room.  The Poke Ball on the table
contains an Eevee!  Eevee can be evolved into one of 3 Pokemon
(a Water-type, Electric-type, or Fire-type), and it can fill in a
missing type on your team. Plus, you get it at level 25, so you
won't have to train it that much from the beginning!
	Now return back out of the building and back to where the
Center is.  Head straight left from here and you should see the
Pokemon Mansion, the place you were before with the back
entrance.  You can explore it if you want; there are no more
items to get.  And left of the Mansion is a giant Poke Mart!
This is the biggest Mart of the game, and contains lots of items
that should cater to your needs.

Celadon City Poke Mart:
1F: SERVICE COUNTER

2F: TRAINER'S MARKET
1st Attendant:
TM32:Double Team- $1000
TM33:Reflect- $1000
TM02:Razor Wind- $2000
TM07:Horn Drill- $2000
TM37:Egg Bomb- $2000
TM01:Mega Punch- $3000
TM05:Mega Kick- $3000
TM09:Take Down- $3000
TM17:Submission- $3000
2nd Attendant:
Great Ball- $600
Super Potion- $700
Revive- $1500
Super Repel- $500
Antidote- $100
Burn Heal- $250
Ice Heal- $250
Awakening- $200
Parlyz Heal- $200

3F: TV GAME SHOP

4F: WISEMAN GIFTS
Poke Doll- $1000
Fire Stone- $2100
Thunder Stone- $2100
Water Stone- $2100
Leaf Stone- $2100

5F: DRUG STORE
1st Attendant:
HP Up- $9800
Protein- $9800
Iron- $9800
Carbos- $9800
Calcium- $9800
2nd Attendant:
X Accuracy- $950
Guard Spec.- $700
Dire Hit- $650
X Attack- $500
X Defend- $550
X Speed- $350
X Special- $350

ROOFTOP SQUARE
Vending Machine:
Fresh Water- $200
Soda Pop- $300
Lemonade- $350

	Look through the second floor items first off; you should
probably stock up on Great Balls and Super Potions if you
haven't already.  There are quite a few TMs being sold, but the moves
themselves are not very useful and it's best not to waste your
money on them for now.  There aren't any items being sold on the
third floor, but talk to the man behind the counter to get
TM18:Counter!  This is a move that supposedly reflects back the
damage inflicted on the defending Pokemon back onto the
opponent, but there is a problem with this move that is defined in the
Battle Strategy Guide.
	The fourth floor contains all the important stones.  There
are certain Pokemon that evolve only with these stones; these
Pokemon are:

Pikachu-> Raichu (Thunder Stone, Red/Blue versions ONLY)
Vulpix-> Ninetales (Fire Stone)
Gloom-> Vileplume (Leaf Stone)
Growlithe-> Arcanine (Fire Stone)
Poliwhirl-> Poliwrath (Water Stone)
Weepinbell-> Victreebel (Leaf Stone)
Shellder-> Cloyster (Water Stone)
Exeggcute-> Exeggutor (Leaf Stone)
Staryu-> Starmie (Water Stone)
Eevee-> Vaporeon (Water Stone) OR Jolteon (Thunder Stone), OR Flareon (Fire
Stone)

	And of course, the Moon Stone evolution Pokemon have
already been covered.  Remember, the only way to complete
your Pokedex is to purchase the stones they evolve with! You

can also purchase a Poke Doll here, but you won't need one
until later.
	The fifth floor's first attendant sells drugs, or stat-
enhancers.  They are expensive, but are vital to giving your
Pokemon the best possible stats.  These are discussed in detail
in the Battle Strategy Guide.  There are also some battle-only
stat increasers you can purchase from the second attendant, but
since they take a full turn in battle to use, they're usually
not necessary.
	Head up to the rooftop.  There is a thirsty girl here who
will give you TMs if you give her drinks from the vending
machines on this level.  Give her Fresh Water and she gives you
TM13:Ice Beam, a very powerful Ice-type attack!  Give her Soda
Pop and you get TM48:Rock Slide, which is a great Rock-type
attack.  And finally, give her Lemonade and she gives you
TM49:Tri Attack.  Be sure to pick up some of the drinks for
yourself to; the Lemonade heals 80 HP per use and only costs
only $350, so it's a much better deal than the Super Potion.  You
also need to hold on to at least one drink for use later in the game
to fulfill a special purpose.
	Now that you've thoroughly explored the Poke Mart, head out
and now walk (or bike) all the way to the lower-right corner of
the city.  In one of these small houses there is a bar.  Talk to
the man in glasses in the upper-left corner to get a free COIN
CASE.  You need this for our next stop, the Game Corner.  It's
directly right of the small lake in the middle of the city, and
the Prize Exchange building is right next to it.

Game Corner Prize Exchange (Red/Blue versions):
1st Window:
Abra- 120 coins
Clefairy- 750 coins
Nidorino(Blue), Nidorina(Red)- 1200 coins
2nd Window:
Pinsir(Blue), Scyther(Red)- 2500 coins
Dratini- 4600 coins
Porygon- 6500 coins(Blue), 9999 coins(Red)
3rd Window:
TM23:Dragon Rage- 3300 coins
TM15:Hyper Beam- 5500 coins
TM50:Substitute- 7700 coins

Game Corner Prize Exchange (Yellow version):
1st Window:
Abra- 230 coins
Vulpix- 1000 coins
Wigglytuff- 2680 coins
2nd Window:
Scyther- 6500 coins
Pinsir- 6500 coins
Porygon- 9999 coins
3rd Window:
TM23:Dragon Rage- 3300 coins
TM15:Hyper Beam- 5500 coins
TM50:Substitute- 7700 coins

	The Game Corner is where you spend your money to buy coins
to play the slot machines, and to hopefully gain enough coins to
get a good prize in the Prize Exchange.  You need a Coin Case to
play at all, though, and then you can buy 50 coins for $1000.
Before you buy any, though, check around the floor of the Game
Corner and talk to a few gamblers to get a few hundred coins to
start you out with.  Playing the slot machines is pretty easy;
just put 1, 2, or 3 coins into the slot and roll.  The more
coins you put in, the better chances you have of winning.  Be sure to
save your game beforehand so you can try again if you have bad
luck.  You may also notice that the slots in the Yellow version
look quite different!
	There are some nice prizes in the Prize Exchange, but the
one you should be aiming for is Porygon since you can get all
the other Pokemon outside of the Game Corner.  And since you
probably won't get 9,999 coins (6,500 in Blue) by playing the slots,
you may have to just fork over the $200,000 to buy that many!  Don't
worry; there's no hurry.  Whether or not you want to try to get
one of the somewhat-powerful TMs available is up to you.
	You may have noticed a few Team Rocket members lurking
around Celado., The reason for this is that they're trying to
make business by buying shipments of Pokemon and selling them
off at the Game Corner (you find this out in the house next to the
bar).  We can't let this go on any further, can we?  Talk to the
Rocket member looking at the sign near the coin counter.  He'll
challenge you to a fight!

ROCKET $600
Raticate, level 20- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (496 EXP.)
Zubat, level 20- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic, Bite (231 EXP.)

	If you have trouble with him, you're hopeless to beat Team
Rocket.  After he leaves, press A next to the poster on the wall
to find a hidden switch!  Press it to reveal Team Rocket's
secret hideout.  Go right from the poster to go down the opened
stairway.
	Battle the first Rocket southeast of the steps.

ROCKET $630
Drowzee, level 21- Pound, Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion (459 EXP.)
Machop, level 21- Karate Chop, Low Kick (396 EXP.)

	There's a gate to the south, so go left instead to fight
another Rocket down the hallway.

ROCKET $630
Raticate, level 21- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (522 EXP.)
Raticate, level 21- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (522 EXP.)

	The item south of this Rocket behind the table is an ESCAPE
ROPE.  You can't do anything more on this floor at the moment,
so go back to the staircases and take the one down.  Go down and
fight the Rocket to the left.

ROCKET $510
Zubat, level 17- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic, Bite (196 EXP.)
Koffing, level 17- Tackle, Smog (414 EXP.)
Grimer, level 17- Pound, Disable (327 EXP.)
Zubat, level 17- Leech Life, Screech, Supersonic, Bite (196 EXP.)
Raticate, level 17- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (421 EXP.)

	To the left of this Rocket is a floor-sliding puzzle, one
of the many traps the Rockets like to use.  There are two arrows
leading left.  Take the bottom one to go completely to the left.
When you stop, grab the item in the small niche to the south;
it's the final Moon Stone!  Go back to where you stopped, and
snake your way along the top wall to the end to get a NUGGET.
Again, head back to where you stopped, go down a tad, then take
the arrow right.  Grab TM07:Horn Drill there if you want.  Go
right and down, take the left going-down arrow, and right two
spaces to step onto a right arrow that takes you a little
southeast.  Take the left arrow to go a little southwest.  If
you want to get another item, take the southern arrow left and it'll
take you to behind a wall.  Go to the bottom-left corner and
take the farthest-right arrow up, then grab the SUPER POTION.  Return
to where the two arrows were facing left, and take the top one.
Take the right arrow right below it to exit the maze.
	There is an elevator to the right which gives access to the
bottom floor (your destination), but you need a key to activate
it.  Take the stairway going up to another floor.  Challenge the
Rocket directly to your left.

ROCKET $570
Rattata, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (231 EXP.)
Raticate, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (471 EXP.)
Raticate, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (471 EXP.)
Rattata, level 19- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (231 EXP.)

	And take on the Rocket north of him.

ROCKET $600
Grimer, level 20- Pound, Disable (385 EXP.)
Koffing, level 20- Tackle, Smog (487 EXP.)
Koffing, level 20- Tackle, Smog (487 EXP.)

	Go left of this Rocket to get a HYPER POTION!  This is a
great item that heals up to 200 HP in battle.  Now return back
downstairs, and back to the floor with the maze.  To the left of
the staircase is a little shortcut you can take with arrows
pointing up.  This leads back to the beginning of the maze and a
Rocket you've already defeated.  Go down the staircase that you
haven't been down yet.  On this floor, challenge the Rocket to
the south.

ROCKET $630
Machop, level 21- Karate Chop, Low Kick (396 EXP.)
Machop, level 21- Karate Chop, Low Kick (396 EXP.)

	Take the winding path below this Rocket to get TM10:Double-
Edge.  Now go back left of the staircase, where you will find
another maze.  Enter the small narrow path to the south and take
the first arrow down, so you can get a RARE CANDY in the little
niche.  Take the nearby arrow up, then go up and around the wall
to the left.  At the arrows facing left and right, take the left
one, then down to where there are four successive arrows facing
right.  Take the one second from bottom.  This leads you
directly into the path of a waiting Rocket.

ROCKET $600
Rattata, level 20- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (243 EXP.)
Raticate, level 20- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (496 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 20- Pound, Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion (436 EXP.)

	Go south from this Rocket and right around the wall to
another staircase leading down.  Go to the little room to the
left to get an HP UP.  Head north along the hall, and fight the
lone Rocket in the room to the left.

ROCKET $630
Koffing, level 21- Tackle, Smog (513 EXP.)
Zubat, level 21- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (243 EXP.)

	Talk to the Rocket after you defeat him and he drops the
crucial LIFT KEY (in Yellow, it drops automatically)!  The item
on the other side of the table is TM02:Razor Wind.  Now you need
to backtrack back to the elevator you couldn't activate before.
To do this, first head back up the stairs you just took, take
the arrows to the left up, go up another flight of stairs, and
navigate the maze again on this floor.  Refer to the part
earlier in the guide if you need help.  When you reach the elevator
(there's an opening in the wall that makes it easy to see where
it is), you can now select the floor you wish to go to.  Select
the B4F.  This next part is a little different between Red/Blue
and Yellow.

RED/BLUE: There are two Rocket guards to the north; you need to
defeat them both the unlock the door.  Take preparations; these
guards are a little tougher then the Grunts you've faced so far.

ROCKET $690
Ekans, level 23- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting, Bite (304 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 23- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (457 EXP.)
Arbok, level 23- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting, Bite (724 EXP.)

ROCKET $690
Sandshrew, level 23- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (457 EXP.)
Ekans, level 23- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting, Bite (304 EXP.)
Sandslash, level 23- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (802 EXP.)

	And with that, the door opens and you come face-to-face
with the boss of Team Rocket for the first time, Giovanni!  He is the
most powerful Rocket out there, so take caution!

GIOVANNI $2871 (uses Guard Spec.)
Onix, level 25- Screech, Bind, Rock Throw, Rage (577 EXP.)
Rhyhorn, level 24- Horn Attack (693 EXP.)
Kangaskhan, level 29- Comet Punch, Rage, Bite (1087 EXP.)

	Giovanni's Onix and Rhyhorn should be simple enough to take
out; they're both Rock/Ground types, so they're incredibly weak
to Water and Grass-type attacks.  Kangaskhan looks scary at
level 29, but its attacks are not the strongest; just use your most
powerful attacks against it to take it down.  As a final note,
Giovanni likes to use Guard Spec., which negates all stat-
reducing moves used against him.  After you defeat him, he
disappears and leaves behind SILPH SCOPE.  This is the item that
reveals the ghosts in Pokemon Tower in Lavender Town.

YELLOW: As soon as you walk toward the open door where Giovanni
is, Jessie and James come to interrupt your plans!  Let's show
them your power.

ROCKET $750
Koffing, level 25- Tackle, Smog (610 EXP.)
Meowth, level 25- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (369 EXP.)
Ekans, level 25- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (331 EXP.)

	Jessie and James will try to mess up your Pokemon, pretty
much.  Smog poisons your Pokemon sometimes, Pay Day steals
money, and Glare paralyzes.  Still, if you attack them head-on before
they can inflict their status conditions on you, you should tear
them apart.

GIOVANNI $2871 (uses Guard Spec.)
Onix, level 25- Screech, Bind, Rock Throw, Rage (577 EXP.)
Rhyhorn, level 24- Horn Attack (693 EXP.)
Persian, level 29- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (919 EXP.)

	Giovanni is pretty much the same here as in Red/Blue,
except he uses Persian, the evolved form of Meowth, instead of
Kangaskhan.  Persian is a fast cat that can be deadly.  If you
have any Fighting-type moves, use it against Persian.  Pick up
the SILPH SCOPE after beating Giovanni.

	All you have to do now is exit.  Head south out of this
room and go left, where there is an item on a table.  This item is
IRON, which increases one of your Pokemon's Defense.  Head back
to the elevator and to the BF1.  Looks like there's one more
Rocket to beat before you're out of here.

ROCKET $660
Grimer, level 22- Pound, Disable (423 EXP.)
Koffing, level 22- Tackle, Smog (537 EXP.)

	And with that, the door above opens and you can take the
staircase up out of the secret hideout.  Head back to the Poke
Center for a little bit, then gear yourself up for the Celadon
City Gym!  To get to the gym, you need to go to the bottom
right-hand corner of the city, where you can see an odd tree you can
use Cut on.  Do so, head all the way left, then up the ledge to
where the gym is.

CELADON CITY GYM
Style: Grass
	Grass is the name of the game of this gym, and so
obviously, Fire types are the Pokemon of choice here.  But unless
you chose Charmander as your starter, you'll have needed to train up
either a Vulpix, Growlithe, or Flareon to have the best advantage.
Ground-types are second-best because they are super-effective
against Poison-types (most Grass-types have a secondary Poison-
type), but Grass is super-effective against them in turn.  If
you don't have either, guard yourself well against status effects
and, whatever you do, don't use a Water-type!  Finally, watch
closely for any move combos the trainers might use and do your
best to counter them.

	There are more trainers guarding the leader, Erika, here
than in previous gyms but it's still best to defeat them all to
gain the most experience.  Walk up the middle of the gym to
battle the first two trainers here.

LASS $345
Bellsprout, level 23- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (414 EXP.)
Weepinbell, level 23- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (744 EXP.)

BEAUTY $1470
Oddish, level 21- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (351 EXP.)
Bellsprout, level 21- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (378 EXP.)
Oddish, level 21- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (351 EXP.)
Bellsprout, level 21- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (378 EXP.)

	The Lass uses a status-attack + Wrap combo that could drive
you crazy if you don't knock out her Pokemon right away.  There
are two more trainers outside the center square; challenge them
next.

JR. TRAINER(f) $480
Bulbasaur, level 24- Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder (328 EXP.)
Ivysaur, level 24- Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder (724 EXP.)

BEAUTY $1680
Bellsprout, level 24- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (432 EXP.)
Bellsprout, level 24- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (432 EXP.)

	Bulbasaur/Ivysaur are slightly more dangerous because of
Vine Whip (a strong Grass-type attack) and the Leech Seed +
Poisonpowder combo.  You're almost to Erika!  Battle the three
trainers surrounding her first.

LASS $345
Oddish, level 23- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (384 EXP.)
Gloom, level 23- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (649 EXP.)

BEAUTY $1820
Exeggcute, level 26- Barrage, Hypnosis, Reflect (546 EXP.)

COOLTRAINER(f) $840
Weepinbell, level 24- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore (775 EXP.)
Gloom, level 24- Absorb, Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder (678 EXP.)
Ivysaur, level 24- Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder (724 EXP.)

	As you can see, CoolTrainers are tougher than your average
trainer!  She should be a test of your abilities; if you can
beat her no problem, then go ahead and challenge Erika.  If not, your
Pokemon are underleveled and you need to go back and train on
the previous routes some more.  When you're ready, talk to Erika to
begin your fourth gym leader battle!

GYM LEADER Erika (uses Super Potion) TM21:Mega Drain, Rainbow Badge
Red/Blue: $2871
Victreebel, level 29- Wrap, Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Razor Leaf (1186 EXP.)
Tangela, level 24- Constrict, Bind, (853 EXP.)
Vileplume, level 29- Poisonpowder, Mega Drain, Sleep Powder, Petal Dance (1143
EXP.)
Yellow: $3168
Tangela, level 30- Constrict, Bind, Vine Whip, Mega Drain (1066 EXP.)
Weepinbell, level 32- Sleep Powder, Stun Spore, Acid, Razor Leaf (1035 EXP.)
Gloom, level 32- Acid, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder, Petal Dance (904 EXP.)

	After taking down all the previous trainers in this gym,
you should have an idea of what to expect here, although it still
may be the hardest gym leader battle so far.  In Red/Blue,
Victreebel, the evolution of Weepinbell, is the first Pokemon.
Erika's general preference is to put your Pokemon to sleep and
then pound you with attacks; in Victreebel's case, it's Razor
Leaf.  To beat her Pokemon, you need to either use Fire-types,
Ice Beam (gotten from the Game Corner), Flying-types, or Ground-
types; you can also use a Grass-type against her to guard
against status effects and beat her down with physical attacks.
Tangela is not a problem since it only knows a couple weak attacks.
Vileplume knows the strongest Grass attack in Petal Dance, but
after she uses it, Vileplume becomes Confused and vulnerable to
attack.
	In Yellow, Erika is a little bit better-prepared with her
Grass-types.  Tangela is at level 30 and a straight Grass-type,
so you can't use Psychic or Ground to your advantage, and it
knows Mega Drain, a powerful attack that steals your HP (like a
more dangerous Leech Life from Zubat).  Weepinbell and Gloom use
Acid as their staple attack (it's Poison-type), and try to
Paralyze or put to sleep your poor Pokemon.  The same tactics
apply here as in Red/Blue: You should have at least one Pokemon
at this stage in the game that can have somewhat of an advantage
against them, and that includes Flying, Ground, Psychic, Fire,
or Ice attacks.
	You are now more closer to reaching your goal than ever!
Beating Erika gives you the TM21:Mega Drain (a good Grass-type
attack but not as useful as Razor Leaf), lots of money, and the
fourth badge.





________________________________________________________________
	6. Soul Badge
	Now you have a choice as to where you want to go next on
your journey.  You can either head straight to Fuchsia and get
the badge by the Cycling Road or Routes 12-15, or get the badge
at Saffron first (although you need to beat Team Rocket at both
the Pokemon Tower before you do either).  In this walkthrough,
we will first take out Team Rocket at the Pokemon Tower in Lavender
Town, then get the Fuchsia badge, then deal with Saffron.
	Hi-tail back through the underground path east to Lavender,
and enter Pokemon Tower.  There appear to be a lot of sad people
here!  Head up the steps to the right.  Who's that up there?
It's your old pal!  Be prepared; he's made quite a few changes
since we've last met.

RIVAL Gary
Red/Blue: $1625
Pidgeotto, level 25- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (604 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 23- Bite, Roar, Ember, Leer (447 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 22- Barrage, Hypnosis (465 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 20- Teleport, Confusion, Disable (621 EXP.)
Wartortle, level 25- Tail Whip, Bubble, Water Gun, Bite (769 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeotto, level 25- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (604 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 23- Thrash, Tackle, Bite (1054 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 22- Bite, Roar, Ember (429 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 20- Teleport, Confusion, Disable (621 EXP.)
Ivysaur, level 25- Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder (754 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeotto, level 25- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (604 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 23- Barrage, Hypnosis (483 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 22- Thrash, Tackle, Bite (1008 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 20- Teleport, Confusion, Disable (621 EXP.)
Charmeleon, level 25- Growl, Ember, Leer, Rage (760 EXP.)
Yellow: $1625
Fearow, level 25- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (867 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 23- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (308 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 22- Tackle, Sonicboom (419 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 20- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (397 EXP.)
Eevee, level 25- Growl, Tail Whip, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (492 EXP.)
OR
Fearow, level 25- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (867 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 23- Tackle, Sonicboom (438 EXP.)
Shellder, level 22- Tackle, Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp (466 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 20- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (397 EXP.)
Eevee, level 25- Growl, Tail Whip, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (492 EXP.)
OR
Fearow, level 25- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (867 EXP.)
Shellder, level 23- Tackle, Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp (477 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 22- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (297 EXP.)
Sandshrew, level 20- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash (397 EXP.)
Eevee, level 25- Growl, Tail Whip, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack (492 EXP.)

	As you can see, Gary has now established the types he would
like to use on his team.  In Red/Blue, he uses the main types:
Flying, Water, Fire, Grass, and Psychic.  In Yellow, he uses
Flying, Fire, Water, Ground, and Normal types (although his
Eevee is yet to evolve.  In Red/Blue, what his team is depends on what
Pokemon you chose from the start, and in Yellow, what team he
uses depends on whether or not you beat him in the first two
matches against him.  Gary should not be challenging right now,
since his levels are far below that of Erika's.  This team is
basically a foreshadowing of things to come from him. After you
beat him, make your way left up to the next step to begin your
climb up the tower.

POKeMON TOWER Wild Pokemon
Gastly- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Haunter- Common (R,B,Y)
Cubone- Rare (R,B)

	Gastly are everywhere in the Pokemon Tower, but Haunter
(the evolution of Gastly) and Cubone are hard to find.  To unlock the
identity of the ghosts in here at all, you need the SILPH SCOPE
from Celadon which you should have already gotten.  You will be
fighting mostly Ghost-types here, so you need to know that
Ghosts are immune to Normal and Fighting-type attacks.  All this means
is that you need to make sure you use other types of attacks,
and you should be fine.  These Ghosts, because they are part Poison
as well, are weak to Ground and Psychic-type attacks.
	After going up the first stairwell and getting the hint
from the Channeler about the Silph Scope, head up in this room.
Challenge the Channeler near the item ball.

CHANNELER $690
Gastly, level 23- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (468 EXP.)

	This tower is infested by these possessed Channelers.  The
item ball contains an ESCAPE ROPE; grab it, then return and go
south to fight the Channeler directly to the right.

CHANNELER $660
Gastly, level 22- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (447 EXP.)

	And challenge the one directly north of her.

CHANNELER $720
Gastly, level 24- Lick, Confused Ray, Night Shade (487 EXP.)

	Go around the gravestones to the right and take the next
staircase up.  There's a Channeler directly to the left.

CHANNELER $690
Gastly, level 23- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (468 EXP.)
Gastly, level 23- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (468 EXP.)

	The two item balls in clear view from here contain ELIXER
and AWAKENING.  Fight the Channeler that was south of the last
one.

CHANNELER $660
Gastly, level 22- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (447 EXP.)

	Grab the useful HP UP in the niche to the south.  Northwest
of here is the last Channeler on this floor.

CHANNELER $720
Gastly, level 24- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (487 EXP.)

	...And take the staircase up to the left of her!  Go east
and fight the Channeler to the north.

CHANNELER $660
Gastly, level 22- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (447 EXP.)

	Challenge the Channeler southeast of her.

CHANNELER $690
Haunter, level 23- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (621 EXP.)

	Talk to the Channeler left of her.  She won't challenge
you, but instead, she shows you the four-square space she sealed with
white magic!  Step into it to heal your Pokemon if you need to,
then challenge the Channeler to the left.

CHANNELER $720
Gastly, level 24- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (487 EXP.)

	Grab the NUGGET south of her, and take on the last
Channeler to the south.

CHANNELER $660
Haunter, level 22- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (594 EXP.)

	Now you can go northeast of here to take the next staircase
up.  Take on the Channeler to the left.

CHANNELER $660
Gastly, level 22- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (447 EXP.)
Gastly, level 22- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (447 EXP.)
Gastly, level 22- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (447 EXP.)

	There is an X ACCURACY right to the south of her.  Go all
the way north to fight the next Channeler.

CHANNELER $720
Gastly, level 24- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (487 EXP.)

	Head around the gravestones to the left and fight this
Channeler. It's the last one!

CHANNELER $720
Gastly, level 24- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade (487 EXP.)

	Grab the RARE CANDY blocking the path to the southwest.
Now locate the staircase to the southeast.  There is the ghost-form
of the murdered Marowak (Cubone's mother) the townspeople were
talking about here; and if you don't have the Silph Scope, it
doesn't let you pass.  If you do have it, however, you reveal
its true form.  The Marowak is at level 30 and unfortunately you
can't catch it, so you have to knock it out to lay its soul to
rest.  Remember that it's a Ground-type and that Water and
Grass-type attacks are best to use against it.
	Go up the staircase to enter the final hall.  You've found
Team Rocket!  In Red/Blue, take all three of the Grunts out
quickly.

Red/Blue:
ROCKET $750
Zubat, level 25- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (288 EXP.)
Zubat, level 25- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (288 EXP.)
Golbat, level 25- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (915 EXP.)

ROCKET $780
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 26- Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion, Headbutt (567 EXP.)

ROCKET $690
Zubat, level 23- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (265 EXP.)
Rattata, level 23- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (280 EXP.)
Raticate, level 23- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (571 EXP.)
Zubat, level 23- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (265 EXP.)

	In Yellow, however, you'll be attacked by Jessie and James
again!  They've finally evolved their Ekans and Koffing, but
once again, they just don't have strong enough attacks to pose a
serious threat to you.

Yellow:
ROCKET $810
Meowth, level 27- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (399 EXP.)
Arbok, level 27- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (850 EXP.)
Weezing, level 27- Tackle, Smog (1000 EXP.)

	After taking care of the last of the Rockets, you'll see
Mr. Fuji up there.  It appears that he came here of his own free
will to pray for Marowak.  He takes you to his house, nevertheless,
and talk to him afterwards to get the POKeFLUTE!  This is an
important item that not only acts as a permanent AWAKENING, but
is also necessary for further advancement in your adventure.
	Your job at Lavender Town is finished, so it's time to
decide how you want to get to Fuchsia.  Would you rather take
the Cycling Road west of Celadon City (the faster route) or Routes
12-15 south of Lavender (the longer route but gives you more
experience)?  It's your choice; if you feel up for it, you can
do both!

THE CYCLING ROAD (Routes 16-18):
	Head back to Celadon City, and go west to Route 16.  You
should see a small tree in the narrow route; use Cut on it to
reveal a secret passage!  There's a little patch of grass here.

ROUTE 16 Wild Pokemon
Rattata- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Raticate- Common (R,B,Y)
Spearow- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Fearow- Common (R,B,Y)
Ponyta- Common (Y)
Doduo- Common (R,B,Y)
Dodrio- Rare (Y)

ROUTES 17-18 Wild Pokemon:
Land:
Rattata- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Raticate- Common (R,B,Y)
Spearow- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Fearow- Common (R,B,Y)
Ponyta- Common (Y)
Doduo- Common (R,B,Y)
Dodrio- Rare (Y)
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	The main Pokemon here should be a Doduo; be sure to catch
it, and possibly Dodrio and Ponyta in the Yellow version.  The
wild Pokemon stand the same for Routes 16-18, which include all
of Cycling Road. Now west from the patch of grass is the north
part of the guard house; you can enter here!  Go to the other
side and enter the cottage.  The girl there gives you HM02:Fly!
This is a very useful HM you can teach to all Flying-types to
take you to a town that you've already been to instantly.  It's
the ultimate way to skip around the globe.
	Return to the patch of grass and down to Cut the tree
again, and to the left you'll find a giant Pokemon blocking the way.
This Pokemon is a level 30 Snorlax, and the only way to move it
out of the way is first by using your Poke Flute you got from
Mr. Fuji to wake it up, then battle it.  There are only two Snorlax
in Kanto, so you need to make sure you capture at least one of
them.  To do this, you will probably need a lot of Great Balls
and luck.  It doesn't help a lot to give it a status ailment
because it uses Rest to cure everything, but you can use that to
your advantage.  The best way to capture a Snorlax is by
damaging it until it uses Rest, then hurriedly put some damage on
it and throw some balls at it while it's still asleep.  Snorlax
requires time and patience to capture; as long as you've saved
beforehand, however, you'll eventually get him.
	After you've either captured or KO'd it, Snorlax is no
longer blocking your way and you can head onto the Cycling Road.
Note that you must have a Bicycle to traverse this route;
otherwise, either get one by using the Bike Voucher obtained in
Vermilion or go to Fuchsia via Routes 12-15 south of Lavender.
At the top of the slope is a whole gang of Bikers that uses all
Poison and Fighting-types; you may want to bring an Antidote or
two.  Challenge them all!

BIKER $580
Grimer, level 29- Pound, Disable (558 EXP.)
Koffing, level 29- Tackle, Smog (708 EXP.)

CUE BALL $700
Red/Blue:
Machop, level 28- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (528 EXP.)
Mankey, level 28- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (444 EXP.)
Machop, level 28- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (528 EXP.)
Yellow:
Machop, level 28- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (528 EXP.)
Mankey, level 28- Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (444 EXP.)
Machop, level 28- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (528 EXP.)

CUE BALL $725
Red/Blue:
Mankey, level 29- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (459 EXP.)
Machop, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (546 EXP.)
Yellow:
Mankey, level 29- Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (459 EXP.)
Machop, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (546 EXP.)

BIKER $520
Grimer, level 26- Pound, Disable (501 EXP.)
Grimer, level 26- Pound, Disable (501 EXP.)
Grimer, level 26- Pound, Disable (501 EXP.)
Grimer, level 26- Pound, Disable (501 EXP.)

BIKER $660
Weezing, level 33- Tackle, Smog, Sludge (1222 EXP.)

CUE BALL $825
Machop, level 33- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (621 EXP.)

	Having taken care of them, start down the downslope, and
check out the patch of grass to the right where Doduo should be
a little bit more common.  There are also a couple more Bikers.

CUE BALL $725
Machop, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (546 EXP.)
Machoke, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (906 EXP.)

CUE BALL $725
Red/Blue:
Mankey, level 29- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (459 EXP.)
Primeape, level 29- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (925 EXP.)
Yellow:
Mankey, level 29- Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (459 EXP.)
Primeape, level 29- Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy, Rage (925 EXP.)

	And there's one more Biker to the left of them.

BIKER $560
Weezing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (1038 EXP.)
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)
Weezing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (1038 EXP.)

	The path splits to the left and right now.  Here are the
trainers you'll face on the left (the center path has none)

BIKER $660
Muk, level 33- Pound, Disable, Poison Gas (1110 EXP.)


CUE BALL $650
Red/Blue:
Mankey, level 26- Scratch, Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes (411 EXP.)
Mankey, level 26- Scratch, Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes (411 EXP.)
Machoke, level 26- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (813 EXP.)
Machop, level 26- Scratch, Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes (489
 EXP.)
Yellow:
Mankey, level 26- Leer, Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes (411 EXP.)
Mankey, level 26- Leer, Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes (411 EXP.)
Machoke, level 26- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (813 EXP.)
Machop, level 26- Leer, Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes (489 EXP.)

BIKER $580
Weezing, level 29- Tackle, Smog (1074 EXP.)
Muk, level 29- Pound, Disable (975 EXP.)

	And here are the trainers on the right path:

BIKER $580
Voltorb, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (639 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (639 EXP.)

CUE BALL $825
Machoke, level 33- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (1032 EXP.)

CUE BALL $725
Red/Blue:
Primeape, level 29- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (925 EXP.)
Machoke, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (906 EXP.)
Yellow:
Primeape, level 29- Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy, Rage (925 EXP.)
Machoke, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (906 EXP.)

	And both the paths converge onto the center where you'll
face one final trainer.

BIKER $500
Koffing, level 25- (610 EXP.)
Weezing, level 25- (925 EXP.)
Koffing, level 25- (610 EXP.)
Koffing, level 25- (610 EXP.)
Weezing, level 25- (925 EXP.)

	The slope finally comes to an end below this trainer.  Head
east to the guard house and hop off your bike.  If you're in
Red/Blue, be sure to head up the stairs and talk the man there.
He'll offer you to trade your Slowbro for a Lickitung!  This is
the only place you can get a Lickitung, so don't hesitate to
trade if you're filling up your Pokedex (just don't use it as
part of your team).  In Yellow, though, it's just a Tangela for
Parasect trade, and Parasects are comparatively easy to come by.
In any case, exit east out of this house.  There is one final
patch of grass to the south with a few more trainers, but the
wild Pokemon are still the same.  These trainers all use Flying-
types.

BIRD KEEPER $725
Spearow, level 29- Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move, Drill Peck (360 EXP.)
Fearow, level 29- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (1006 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $650
Spearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (322 EXP.)
Spearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (322 EXP.)
Fearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (901 EXP.)
Spearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (322 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $850
Dodrio, level 34- Peck, Growl, Fury Attack, Drill Peck (1150 EXP.)

	Directly east from here is Fuchsia City!

THE WALKING ROAD (Routes 12-15):
	What follows is a true test of a Pokemon trainer's stamina.
If you can make it through all the trainers on these four routes
in one go, consider yourself well off!  However, just to be
safe, have a Pokemon on your team that knows Fly (even if it isn't one
of you fighters) so you can Fly back to Lavender when your team
is hurting.  Head south on the docks to the guard house, and get
TM39:Swift from the girl upstairs.  Exit the building south to
begin your trek.

ROUTE 12 Wild Pokemon
Land:
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Rare (Y)
Oddish- Very Common (R,Y)
Gloom- Common (R,Y)
Venonat- Common (R,B,Y)
Venomoth- Rare (Y)
Bellsprout- Very Common (B,Y)
Weepinbell- Common (B,Y)
Farfetch'd- Common (Y)
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Slowpoke- Common (Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

ROUTE 13 Wild Pokemon:
Land:
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Rare (Y)
Oddish- Very Common (R,Y)
Gloom- Common (R,Y)
Venonat- Common (R,B,Y)
Venomoth- Rare (Y)
Bellsprout- Very Common (B,Y)
Weepinbell- Common (B,Y)
Farfetch'd- Common (Y)
Ditto- Rare (R,B,Y)
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Slowpoke- Common (Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

ROUTES 14-15 Wild Pokemon:
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Rare (R,B,Y)
Oddish- Very Common (R,Y)
Gloom- Common (R,Y)
Venonat- Common (R,B,Y)
Venomoth- Rare (Y)
Bellsprout- Very Common (B,Y)
Weepinbell- Common (B,Y)
Ditto- Common (R,B,Y)

	Head down south around the bend on the docks to meet the
first Fisherman.

FISHERMAN $770
Goldeen, level 22- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic (522 EXP.)
Poliwag, level 22- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun (363 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 22- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic (522 EXP.)

	The item on the block in the middle of the water is
TM16:Pay Day, but obviously you can't get there until you can Surf first.
Head west to another trainer.

FISHERMAN $840
Tentacool, level 24- Supersonic, Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun (540 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 24- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (570 EXP.)

	And southeast to another Fisherman below him.

FISHERMAN $945
Goldeen, level 27- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (642 EXP.)

	Continue south to yet another Fisherman.

FISHERMAN $735
Poliwag, level 21- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun (346 EXP.)
Shellder, level 21- Tackle, Withdraw, Supersonic (436 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 21- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic (499 EXP.)
Horsea, level 21- Bubble, Smokescreen (373 EXP.)

	Now when you continue south you come across the other
Snorlax.  If you didn't catch the other one, make sure to catch
this one or you will never see it again!  Use your Pokeflute on
the Snorlax to wake it up, and see the Cycling Road section for
strategies on how to capture it.
	With that taken care of, you now have free access to Route
11 from here, and more importantly, the routes below.  Head
south to where the house is and battle the trainer here.  The enemy
levels will start to rise.

ROCKER $725
Voltorb, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (639 EXP.)
Electrode, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (931 EXP.)

	Go into that house and speak to the Fishing Guru to get the
SUPER ROD, the strongest rod in the game!  Now you can catch ANY
Pokemon that appears in the Wild Pokemon: Water list, so feel
free to take the time and catch up on your Pokedex.  When you're
ready to move on, go south from the Fishing Guru's house and you
should notice a small square of woods on your left.  Cut it down
to fight a Fisherman and gain an IRON.

FISHERMAN $840
Magikarp, level 24- Splash, Tackle (102 EXP.)
Magikarp, level 24- Splash, Tackle (102 EXP.)

	Battle the trainer southeast of the crop of bushes.

JR. TRAINER(m) $580
Red/Blue:
Nidoran(m), level 29- Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Focus Energy, Fury Attack (372
EXP.)
Nidorino, level 29- Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Focus Energy (732 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidoran(m), level 29- Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Focus Energy (372 EXP.)
Nidorino, level 29- Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Focus Energy (732 EXP.)

	Heading south of him, you should notice another cuttable
tree to your left, this one leading to a big patch of grass.  In
Red and Blue you won't find any new Pokemon here, but in Yellow,
this is your chance to catch a Farfetch'd and Venomoth and add
them to your collection.
	Keep going south to enter Route 13 and you'll encounter a
female trainer.

JR. TRAINER(f) $560
Goldeen, level 28- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (666 EXP.)
Poliwag, level 28- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (462 EXP.)
Horsea, level 28- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (498 EXP.)

	Directly south from her is a couple.

BIRD KEEPER $725
Pidgey, level 29- Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack (340 EXP.)
Pidgeotto, level 29- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (702 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $480
Pidgey, level 24- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (282 EXP.)
Meowth, level 24- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (354 EXP.)
Rattata, level 24- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (292 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 24- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (282 EXP.)
Meowth, level 24- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (354 EXP.)

	Going west, you have now reached an area named Silence
Bridge.  Head west from the Silence Bridge sign and press A in
the space to the right of the sign behind the barrier to find a
CALCIUM.  The following is the list of trainers on Silence
Bridge.  If you want, there is a cuttable tree on the northeast
part of here, in which you can search for the new Pokemon Ditto
if you'd like.

BEAUTY $1890
Rattata, level 27- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (328 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 27- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (364 EXP.)
Rattata, level 27- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (328 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2030
Clefairy, level 29- Growl, Sing, Doubleslap, Minimize (421 EXP.)
Meowth, level 29- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (427 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $600
Poliwag, level 30- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (495 EXP.)
Poliwag, level 30- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (495 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $540
Pidgey, level 27- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (318 EXP.)
Meowth, level 27- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (399 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 27- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (318 EXP.)
Pidgeotto, level 27- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (652 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $650
Pidgey, level 26- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (306 EXP.)
Pidgeotto, level 26- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (628 EXP.)
Spearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (322 EXP.)
Fearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (901 EXP.)

	To the left of this Bird Keeper you can find a PP UP in the
space in the barriers.

BIRD KEEPER $625
Spearow, level 25- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (310 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 25- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (294 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 25- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (294 EXP.)
Spearow, level 25- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (310 EXP.)
Spearow, level 25- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (310 EXP.)

BIKER $560
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $700
Pidgey, level 28- Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack (330 EXP.)
Doduo, level 28- Peck, Growl, Fury Attack (576 EXP.)
Pidgeotto, level 28- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (678 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $650
Pidgey, level 26- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (306 EXP.)
Spearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (322 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 26- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (306 EXP.)
Fearow, level 26- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (901 EXP.)


BIRD KEEPER $725
Pidgeotto, level 29- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (702 EXP.)
Fearow, level 29- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (1006 EXP.)

	That last Bird Keeper stands at the exit of Silence Bridge.
Right below him, however, is another one!

BIRD KEEPER $700
Spearow, level 28- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (348 EXP.)
Doduo, level 28- Peck, Growl, Fury Attack (576 EXP.)
Fearow, level 28- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (972 EXP.)

	You have now entered the Route 14-15 stretch, which leads
eventually to Fuchsia City.  Keep on moving south where you'll
spot two more trainers.

BIKER $580
Koffing, level 29- Tackle, Smog (708 EXP.)
Muk, level 29- Pound, Disable (975 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $825
Farfetch'd, level 33- Leer, Fury Attack, Swords Dance, Agility (664 EXP.)

	Now if you cut the tree to the left to explore the patch of
grass there, you'll have to face two more Bikers first.

BIKER $580
Koffing, level 29- Tackle, Smog (708 EXP.)
Grimer, level 29- Pound, Disable (558 EXP.)

BIKER $560
Grimer, level 28- Pound, Disable (540 EXP.)
Grimer, level 28- Pound, Disable (540 EXP.)
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)

	You don't even have to visit that patch, since you can find
the same exact Pokemon along the small patches of the west
Route. Try hard to snag one of the elusive Ditto, as well as the
evolved form of your version-exclusive Grass-type; they're more common
here than anywhere else.
	Now if you want, you can cut the tree to the left that's
below the north patch of grass, and you can skip most of the
trainers along these two routes (except one):

JR. TRAINER(f) $660
Clefairy, level 33- Sing, Doubleslap, Minimize, Metronome (480 EXP.)

	This way you can take a shortcut to Fuchsia and get
TM20:Rage.  However, the smart thing to do is to battle all of
the trainers to gain the maximum experience points for your
Pokemon.  Thus, if you feel up for it, try to defeat all the
remaining trainers.  Here is the list of the remaining trainers
spanning the straight road of Routes 14-15:

BIKER $520
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)
Grimer, level 26- Pound, Disable (501 EXP.)
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $725
Spearow, level 29- Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move, Drill Peck (360 EXP.)
Fearow, level 29- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (1006 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $580
Pidgey, level 29- Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack (340 EXP.)
Pidgeotto, level 29- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (702 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2030
Pidgeotto, level 29- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (702 EXP.)
Wigglytuff, level 29- Pound, Growl, Sing, Doubleslap (676 EXP.)

BIKER $500
Koffing, level 25- Tackle, Smog (610 EXP.)
Koffing, level 25- Tackle, Smog (610 EXP.)
Weezing, level 25- Tackle, Smog (925 EXP.)
Koffing, level 25- Tackle, Smog (610 EXP.)
Grimer, level 25- Pound, Disable (481 EXP.)

BIKER $560
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)
Grimer, level 28- Pound, Disable (540 EXP.)
Weezing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (1038 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2030
Bulbasaur, level 29- Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder, Razor Leaf (397 EXP.)
Ivysaur, level 29- Growl, Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder (876 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $560
Gloom, level 28- Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder, Acid (792 EXP.)
Oddish, level 28- Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder, Acid (468 EXP.)
Oddish, level 28- Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder, Acid (468 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $700
Dodrio, level 28- Peck, Growl, Fury Attack (948 EXP.)
Doduo, level 28- Peck, Growl, Fury Attack (576 EXP.)
Doduo, level 28- Peck, Growl, Fury Attack (576 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $650
Pidgeotto, level 26- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (628 EXP.)
Farfetch'd, level 26- Sand-Attack, Leer, Fury Attack, Swords Dance (523 EXP.)
Doduo, level 26- Peck, Growl, Fury Attack (534 EXP.)
Pidgey, level 26- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (306 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $580
Red/Blue:
Bellsprout, level 29- Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore, Acid (522 EXP.)
Oddish, level 29- Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder, Acid (484 EXP.)
Tangela, level 29- Constrict, Bind, Absorb (1030 EXP.)
Yellow:
Bellsprout, level 29- Poisonpowder, Sleep Powder, Stun Spore, Acid (522 EXP.)
Oddish, level 29- Poisonpowder, Stun Spore, Sleep Powder, Acid (484 EXP.)
Tangela, level 29- Constrict, Bind, Absorb, Vine Whip (1030 EXP.)

	After the last trainer, just head west past the guard house
and, congratulations, you've reached Fuchsia City at last!  Head
straight for the Poke Center and heal up those injuries.  The
Poke Mart is located in the northwest section of the city;
you'll need to cut down a tree to get to it.

Fuchsia City Poke Mart:
Ultra Ball -$1200
Great Ball -$600
Super Potion -$700
Revive -$1500
Full Heal -$600
Super Repel -$500

FUCHSIA CITY Wild Pokemon
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Seaking- Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Gyarados- Rare (Y)

	Also, on the beaches in the Yellow version, you may notice
a house to your left that contains the only other Pikachu in the
game.  This is the Surfing Pikachu game, and it's only available
to play after getting a Surfing Pikachu in Pokemon Stadium.  See
the Pokemon Stadium Strategy Guide for details.  Gyarados is
available for catching in the Yellow version here.
	You should be fully prepared after your long hike from
Celadon for the Fuchsia City Gym.  Make that your first
destination.

FUCHSIA CITY GYM
Style: Poison
	Entering the fifth gym in your adventure, you should notice
that there are semi-invisible walls in the room.  You can't walk
through them, and the only way to get to the Gym Leader, Koga,
is to walk around the outside perimeter of the room, starting at
the bottom-right hand corner of the room.
	The trainers here are more difficult than any other ones
you've faced so far in the game.  Some of them use Psychic
Pokemon which can destroy your Fighting-types, and the others
use Poison and Ground-types.  If you've trained up a Kadabra or
Drowzee to this point, you're in great condition, and Ground
attacks are great against Poison as well.  Versus Psychic, you
just have to take advantage of their bad Defense and pound them
with physical attacks.  To start off, battle the trainer directly
northwest of the left statue.

JUGGLER $1190
Drowzee, level 34- Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas, Psychic (742 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 34- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1056 EXP.)

	Jugglers like to withdraw their Pokemon for a different one
sometimes, but most of the time that just helps you.  Next,
battle the Juggler on the other side of the room.

JUGGLER $1330
Hypno, level 38- Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas, Psychic (1342 EXP.)

	Go north of this Juggler to face yet another one.

JUGGLER $1085
Drowzee, level 31- Disable, Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas (676 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 31- Disable, Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas (676 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 31- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (963 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 31- Disable, Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas (676 EXP.)

	Go now to the northeast corner where there is another
trainer obviously in your way.  Don't be afraid of his evolved
Pokemon!

TAMER $1320
Arbok, level 33- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (1039 EXP.)
Sandslash, level 33- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting (1152 EXP.)

Arbok, level 33- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (1039 EXP.)

	Now from the northeast corner, go all the way to the left.
Dip down a couple spaces, then take on the trainer to the right.

TAMER $1360
Sandslash, level 34- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting (1186 EXP.)
Arbok, level 34- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (1071 EXP.)

	Go one left of this trainer, then down a couple more to
fight the last trainer before Koga.

JUGGLER $1190
Drowzee, level 34- Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas, Psychic (742 EXP.)
Hypno, level 34- Disable, Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas (1201 EXP.)

	You should now have access to the center of the gym, where
Koga is.  Save your game, make sure you're prepared with a
couple Full Heals, and challenge him!

GYM LEADER Koga (uses X Attack) TM06:Toxic, Soul Badge
Red/Blue: $4257
Koffing, level 37- Tackle, Smog, Sludge, Smokescreen (903 EXP.)
Muk, level 39- Disable, Poison Gas, Minimize, Sludge (1311 EXP.)
Koffing, level 37- Tackle, Smog, Sludge, Smokescreen (903 EXP.)
Weezing, level 43- Smog, Sludge, Toxic, Selfdestruct (1593 EXP.)
Yellow: $4950
Venonat, level 44- Tackle, Toxic, Sleep Powder, Psychic (706 EXP.)
Venonat, level 46- Supersonic, Toxic, Psybeam, Psychic (738 EXP.)
Venonat, level 48- Double-Edge, Toxic, Sleep Powder, Psychic (771 EXP.)
Venomoth, level 50- Double Team, Toxic, Leech Life, Psychic (1477 EXP.)

	In Red/Blue, Koga follows a very simple strategy: Quickly
poison the opponent, then wittle down its health with other
attacks.  With his Koffings, Koga can use Smokecreen in addition
to lower your accuracy, and with Muk he can raise its own
evasion with Minimize.  Koga also likes to use a lot of X Attacks to
power up his Pokemon's Poison attacks before attacking.  Due to
all this setup that his Pokemon need to be effective though, you
can win pretty decisively if you're quick.  Dig is a useful
Ground-type move you should have available that's super-
effective against all his Pokemon, and any good Psychic-type can rip
through Koga's team.  All you have to worry about are his first
three Pokemon; Koga likes to selfdestruct his Weezing, which
basically gives you a free win as long as you have at least one
other active Pokemon.
	In Yellow, Koga has taken a liking to the Venonat family.
All of his Pokemon know Toxic, the deadly move that poisons your
Pokemon for more damage every passing turn.  It's easy to not
let it be a factor, though; it takes too long for the poison to
become really damaging, and you can just switch out your
poisoned Pokemon.  Besides that, this shouldn't be too hard; despite the
high levels, Koga's Pokemon don't have the greatest stats.  They
are all of the Bug/Poison type, which means you can have a
severe advantage over him with any Flying-type, Fire-type, Rock-type,
Ground-type, or Psychic-type!  You should have at least one or
two of those types in your party to deal with Koga's team.
	After the victory, you are rewarded with the Soul Badge and
nearly $5000 to boot!  You also get TM06:Toxic.  If you're
training up a stalling Pokemon, it's a good idea to hang on to
it.  Otherwise, it's not too useful for your adventure.  Next
stop: Safari Zone!




________________________________________________________________
	7. Marsh Badge
	Since we're still in the area, it's a good idea to start
exploring the Safari Zone now.  Head north from the gym and cut
down a couple trees blocking your way to get to the entry house.
Pay the man the cheap fee of $500 and enter the park. Make sure
to have an empty box in your PC!

SAFARI ZONE Wild Pokemon:
ENTRANCE
Land:
Nidoran(f)- Very Common (B,Y)
Nidorina- Common (R,B)
Nidoran(m)- Very Common (R,Y)
Nidorino- Common (R,B,Y)
Paras- Very Common (Y)
Parasect- Common (R,B,Y)
Venonat- Common (R,B)
Exeggcute- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Rhyhorn- Common (R,B,Y)
Tangela- Rare (Y)
Chansey- Rare (R,B,Y)
Scyther- Rare (R)
Pinsir- Rare (B)
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Slowpoke- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Dratini- Common (R,B,Y)
Dragonair- Rare (R,B,Y)


ZONE 1
Land:
Nidoran(f)- Very Common (B,Y)
Nidorina- Common (R,B,Y)
Nidoran(m)- Very Common (R,Y)
Nidorino- Common (R,B)
Paras- Very Common (R,B)
Parasect- Common (R,B)
Doduo- Common (R,B)
Cubone- Common (Y)
Marowak- Rare (Y)
Exeggcute- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Rhyhorn- Common (R,B)
Kangaskhan- Rare (R,B)
Scyther- Rare (R,Y)
Pinsir- Rare (B)
Tauros- Rare (Y)
Chansey- Rare (Y)
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Slowpoke- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Dratini- Common (R,B,Y)
Dragonair- Rare (R,B,Y)

ZONE 2
Nidoran(f)- Very Common (B,Y)
Nidorina- Common (R,B,Y)
Nidoran(m)- Very Common (R,Y)
Nidorino- Common (R,B)
Paras- Very Common (R,B)
Venomoth- Rare (R,B)
Cubone- Common (Y)
Exeggcute- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Rhyhorn- Common (R,B,Y)
Kangaskhan- Rare (Y)
Scyther- Rare (Y)
Pinsir- Rare (Y)
Chansey- Rare (R,B)
Tauros- Rare (R,B)
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Slowpoke- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Dratini- Common (R,B,Y)
Dragonair- Rare (R,B,Y)

ZONE 3
Nidoran(f)- Very Common (B,Y)
Nidorina- Common (R,B)
Nidoran(m)- Very Common (R,Y)
Nidorino- Common (R,B,Y)
Venonat- Common (R,B)
Venomoth- Rare (R,B)
Doduo- Common (R,B)
Cubone- Common (Y)
Marowak- Rare (Y)
Exeggcute- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Tangela- Common (Y)
Kangaskhan- Rare (R,B)
Pinsir- Rare (Y)
Tauros- Rare (R,B,Y)
Water:
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Slowpoke- Common (R,B)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Dratini- Common (R,B,Y)
Dragonair- Rare (R,B,Y)

	There are a couple important objectives we must complete in
the Safari Zone, but first, let's explore the park inside and
out.  There are many, many exclusive Pokemon here that can't be
found anywhere else.  However, there is a limit to how much you
can explore in one trip!   Once you've taken 500 steps, the PA
calls and forces you to come back.  You can make the trip last a
lot longer, though, if you stand in place in a grass space and
turn around but don't make any steps.  You'll still encounter
wild Pokemon in this way.  The best way to capture Pokemon in
the Safari Zone is to just toss the Safari Balls; throwing bait or
rocks really doesn't help much, and just wastes time.  Don't go
into the houses unless you want to explore; they still take away
your step count, and there aren't any Pokemon there!
	Let's start in the entrance area.  You can find plenty of
Exeggcute, some Rhyhorns and some Parasects.  There are the more
rare types scattered about here but they are very hard to find.
Most importantly, take some time with your Super Rod (found on
Route 12) in the watery area here to fish up some interesting
Pokemon.  You may end up finding Dratini, the lone Dragon-type
Pokemon in the game!  It would be very ambitious to try to raise
a Dratini at this point, but do what you wish.  There are no
items in this area except the NUGGET in the middle of the lake,
so when you are ready, head northeast to Zone 1, or the Center
Area.
	Head up the steps to the right and pick up the CARBOS to
the north.  In the main square area, there is TM37:Egg Bomb on a
little bridge in the water, and a MAX POTION in the northwest
corner of the main square.  Don't forget to grab the FULL
RESTORE right next to the rest house in the northeast of the zone!
As for Pokemon, you should start looking for your rare version-
exclusive Bug Pokemon here: In Red, it's Scyther, and in Blue,
it's Pinsir (in Yellow you can get both, and you can also buy
them in all versions in the Celadon Game Corner). You can catch
a Kangaskhan here also in Red/Blue.  In Yellow, this is your
chance to get a Cubone!  Search hard for one; and possibly you'll
find a Marowak if you're really lucky!  You can also find Chansey
and Tauros in Yellow in this area, so you may want to spend a while
in here.  Afterwards, head northwest from the rest house and
take the route west to Zone 2.
	Go west from the entrance of the zone and take the
zigzagging route where you can see a couple ponds of water.  In
the grass, look for Venomoth, Chansey, and Tauros in Red/Blue,
and Kangaskhan, Cubone, Scyther, and Pinsire in Yellow.  You
should be on the right side of the ponds.  Go up and around the
north row of trees; there's TM40:Skull Bash and a PROTEIN along
the way.  Follow the path to the northwest corner of the area,
then work your way down, now on the left side of the ponds.
	You are now in Zone 3!  Right below you are the very
important GOLD TEETH, and you'll find out why you need them
soon. Head west, grab TM32:Double Team if you want, and enter the
secret house!  The man inside will give you HM03:Surf!  Teach it
to one of your Pokemon right away; now that you have the Soul
Badge, you can surf on water!   Test it out (if you have a Water
Pokemon in your party) by swimming south over the lake and
exploring the Zone 3 grasses.  Yellow owners can search for
Tangela, Marowak, Pinsir, and Tauros here, and Red/Blue owners
can search for Venomoth, Kangaskhan, and Tauros.  Additionally,
there is a MAX POTION and a MAX REVIVE placed around the rock
face.  You now have the items you came here to get, so exit when
you're ready to get back to Fuchsia.
	Go down to the southeast part of Fuchsia, where there are a
couple square houses.  The left one is the important one.  Give
the Golden Teeth to the Warden inside, and he'll give you
HM04:Strength, which lets you move boulders when taught to a
Pokemon!  Test it out in this house by moving aside that boulder
to get a RARE CANDY.

	Now that you have Surf, we can go on a special
sidequest to get a legendary Pokemon.  Our objective is to get to the
Power Plant, which is near the entrance to Rock Tunnel.  To start off,
however, make sure you're well-supplied. You need to purchase

20-30
Great Balls (almost as good as Ultra Balls, and a lot cheaper), and have
at least one Pokemon that knows a status attack like Thunder Wave or Hypnosis.
Fly to Cerulean City, then head east to Route 9 all the way to the patch
of grass north of the Poke Center.  Now go north of the patch to the river
that runs around.  Follow the river, using Surf, going all the way
south and then getting back onto land.  There's a trainer to the
west.

POKeMANIAC $1500
Rhyhorn, level 30- Horn Attack, Stomp (867 EXP.)
Lickitung, level 30- Supersonic, Stomp, Disable, Defense Curl (816 EXP.)

	The building right ahead is the Power Plant!  Enter at your
own risk.

POWER PLANT Wild Pokemon
Pikachu- Common (R,B)
Raichu- Rare (R,B)
Magnemite- Common (R,B,Y)
Magneton- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Grimer- Very Common (Y)
Muk- Rare (Y)
Voltorb- Common (R,B,Y)
Electrode- Rare (R,B,Y)
Electabuzz- Common (R)

	Take a look at the Pokemon here and you may see a couple
you need.  Magneton are here a plenty, so take at least one.  For
Red owners, this is the only place Electabuzz can be found!  There
also wild Pikachu and Raichu in Red/Blue if you didn't catch one
way back in Viridian Forest.  The real reason we're here,
though, is found at the end of the Power Plant path.
	Heading north from the entrance, take the CARBOS to your
right.  Take the u-turn down, and to your right you'll notice
something that looks like an item ball.  However, it's actually
a high-level Voltorb!  Those are scattered throughout the Power
Plant, and you must be cautious.  The path directly east from
that Voltorb leads to a dead end with a Voltorb and Electrode
hiding as Poke Balls, but if you press A next to the wall west
of the Electrode you'll get a MAX ELIXER.  Return back to the
middle path leading south, and go all the way south.  In the room
east there is a Voltorb to the right and TM33:Reflect to the left.
Now take the path right you haven't been in yet.  Both the item
balls here are Voltorbs.  When you see a crack in the wall going
south, grab the west item ball to get TM25:Thunder!  The ball to
the east is another Voltorb.  Head east until you hit the east
wall, then follow it up.  Where the path opens to a little room
to the north, you can find both a useful HP UP and a RARE CANDY.
Back on the main corridor, follow it up and down around the
wall, and the item ball to the south contains an Electrode.  Go up
the obvious path and press A next to the right crack in the wall for
a PP UP.  Now dip to the left and down and you've reached
Zapdos!  Save your game right now and get prepared to capture it.
	Zapdos is the first of three legendary birds in
Red/Blue/Yellow, and each one of them can only be encountered
once; so if you fail to capture it now, you won't have another
chance again!  As for how to snag it, the legendary birds are
very fast and quick, so unless you immobilize them with
paralysis, freeze, or sleep, they will be very difficult to
catch.  Also, you have to use Great Balls or Ultra Balls here;
there is no way to catch them with ordinary Poke Balls.  So to
begin the battle, inflict your status condition to stop them
from damaging your Pokemon so easily, and wittle down its HP
gradually.  Once you've gotten it down to the red, or critical
zone, and it's still under the effects of the status, then you
can begin throwing Great/Ultra Balls at it.  It can still take
some time and patience, and if you run out of balls you should
restart the game and try again.  Once you've caught it, can
become a very valuable remember of your team at level 50,
especially if you don't already have an Electric-type.

	Now it's time to get back to the main quest.  Your
objective now is to gain access to Saffron City; if you've noticed the
guards blocking the entrances on all four sides of the city, it
would appear you can't get in.  This is easily fixed; Fly over
to the Celadon City Department Store, and buy one of the
refreshments on the rooftop square.  While you're there, Surf
across the pond in the middle of the city and talk to the man to
get TM41:Softboiled.  Give the refreshment to one of the guards,
and he'll happily accept the drink and let you in.  He'll also
share it with the other guards so you don't have to do it again.
	Saffron is a giant city with many things to do within, but
you'll notice that it's being temporarily held up by Team
Rocket.  Many of the houses are blocked up, and your exploration is
limited for the time being.  Before you go to stop Team Rocket,
however, there are a couple of things you can do.  First, go to
Mr. Psychic's house at the southeast corner of the city to get
TM29:Psychic!  This is a very useful and powerful attack you
should teach to a special-type Pokemon.  Next, if you go up a
couple row of houses, you can enter the Poke Mart from the right
side of the very large building.

Saffron City Poke Mart:
Great Ball -$600
Hyper Potion -$1500
Max Repel -$700
Escape Rope -$550
Full Heal -$600
Revive -$1500

	Finally, if you go to the northeast part of the city, you
should notice that there are two gyms!  One is blocked, one
isn't.  Enter the one that isn't.
	This is the karate dojo, and isn't an actual gym per se.
You don't get a badge for defeating the master, but you do win
an important prize.  Challenge the four students first; you
shouldn't have too much trouble with the Fighting-types they
use.  Psychic and Flying-types work best against them, just in case
you need to know.

BLACKBELT $775
Red/Blue:
Machop, level 31- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (583 EXP.)
Mankey, level 31- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (490 EXP.)
Primeape, level 31- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (988 EXP.)
Yellow:
Machop, level 31- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (583 EXP.)
Mankey, level 31- Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (490 EXP.)
Primeape, level 31- Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy, Rage (988 EXP.)

BLACKBELT $800
Machop, level 32- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (603 EXP.)
Machoke, level 32- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (1000 EXP.)

BLACKBELT $900
Red/Blue:
Primeape, level 36- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (1149 EXP.)
Yellow:
Primeape, level 36- Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy, Rage (1149 EXP.)

BLACKBELT $775
Red/Blue:
Mankey, level 31- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (490 EXP.)
Mankey, level 31- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (490 EXP.)
Primeape, level 31- Leer, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (988 EXP.)
Yellow:

Mankey, level 31- Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (490 EXP.)
Mankey, level 31- Low Kick, Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy (490 EXP.)
Primeape, level 31- Karate Chop, Fury Swipes, Focus Energy, Rage (988 EXP.)

	After they're taken care of, talk to the master BlackBelt
to challenge him.

BLACKBELT $925
Hitmonlee, level 37- Double Kick, Meditate, Rolling Kick (1101 EXP.)
Hitmonchan, level 37- Comet Punch, Agility, Fire Punch (1110 EXP.)

	After defeating him, take you pick prize Pokemon: The
Hitmonlee on the left, or the Hitmonchan on the right.  You can
only get one, and the only way you can get the other one is by
trading with a friend.  If you want to use one on your team,
choose Hitmonlee.  Hitmonchan is a terrible fighter, so it won't
do you any good.  Now you're free to take on Team Rocket!  Head
to the giant Silph Co. building near the middle of the city and
enter.  If there's a Rocket blocking your way then you haven't
beaten the Rockets at the Lavender Town Pokemon Tower yet.  Get
to it!
	Silph Co. is swarming with Rockets.  Before you do anything
else, head to the 5th floor.  Go southwest and down the small
corridor.  You should see a Rocket next to a square thing.  These
squares are teleporters that transport you to another floor of
the building.  It's best to avoid them as much as possible to
avoid getting lost.  You absolutely have to fight this Rocket, so
just do it now.

ROCKET $990
Arbok, level 33- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (1039 EXP.)


	Step into the teleporter, then step into it again after you
land.  You can now go into the tiny corridor leading to the
right; this leads to the CARD KEY!  Now you have free access to
all the rooms in the building.  You could simply go straight to
the 3rd floor now and unlock the door which leads to the boss,
but we're going to explore the building starting from the 2nd
floor and going up.  In the second floor, there's a Rocket below
the stairs.  Fight and defeat him.

ROCKET $750
Golbat, level 25- Leech Life, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (915 EXP.)
Zubat, level 25- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (288 EXP.)
Zubat, level 25- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (288 EXP.)
Raticate, level 25- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (621 EXP.)
Zubat, level 25- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (288 EXP.)

	Southwest of this Rocket is another one in between the
tables.

ROCKET $870
Red/Blue:
Cubone, level 29- Growl, Bone Club, Leer (540 EXP.)
Zubat, level 29- Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray, Wing Attack (334 EXP.)
Yellow:
Cubone, level 29- Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt, Leer (540 EXP.)
Zubat, level 29- Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray, Wing Attack (334 EXP.)

	There's a scientist in the room east of this Rocket.

SCIENTIST $1400
Magnemite, level 28- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock (534 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 28- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct (618 EXP.)
Magneton, level 28- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock (966 EXP.)

	There are two rooms in the west you can open up with the
Card Key; the bottom one leads to a Scientist...

SCIENTIST $1300
Grimer, level 26- Pound, Disable (501 EXP.)
Weezing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (963 EXP.)
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)
Weezing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (963 EXP.)

	...and the top one leads to a girl who gives you
TM36:Selfdestruct.  Take the steps up to the 3rd floor, and
fight the Rocket down the middle corridor.

ROCKET $840
Raticate, level 28- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (696 EXP.)
Hypno, level 28- Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion, Headbutt (990 EXP.)
Raticate, level 28- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (696 EXP.)

	Unlock the two doors on your left and fight the Scientist.

SCIENTIST $1450
Electrode, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (931 EXP.)
Weezing, level 29- Tackle, Smog (1074 EXP.)

	Grab the HYPER POTION in the northeast corner of this room.
Now you could take the teleporter here which leads to the path
to the boss, but we're on a mission to clear this building of all
the Rockets, so head up to the 4th floor.  Go straight south and
fight this Rocket.

ROCKET $840
Red/Blue:
Ekans, level 28- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (372 EXP.)
Zubat, level 28- Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray, Wing Attack (324 EXP.)
Cubone, level 28- Growl, Bone Club, Leer (522 EXP.)
Yellow:
Ekans, level 28- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (372 EXP.)
Zubat, level 28- Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray, Wing Attack (324 EXP.)
Cubone, level 28- Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt, Leer (522 EXP.)

	Go down the tiny passage in the middle of the room and left
to another Rocket.

ROCKET $870
Machop, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (546 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 29- Disable, Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas (633 EXP.)

	Open up the door directly north of this Rocket to face
another Scientist.

SCIENTIST $1650
Electrode, level 33- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (1060 EXP.)

	Open up the remaining in this door to find a few items: an
ESCAPE ROPE on the right, a MAX REVIVE in the middle, and a FULL
HEAL on the left.  Head up the stairs to get back to the 5th
floor, and fight the Rocket on the right blocking the tight
corridor.

ROCKET $990
Hypno, level 33- Disable, Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas (1165 EXP.)

	Go into the large room with the big table and fight the
trainer here.

JUGGLER $1015
Kadabra, level 29- Teleport, Confusion, Disable, Psybeam (900 EXP.)
Mr. Mime, level 29- Confusion, Barrier, Light Screen (844 EXP.)

	Feel free to read the Pokemon Reports on the table if you'd
like.  Open the door to the left to free one of the Silph
employees, then to the left side of the floor to fight the
Scientist here.

SCIENTIST $1300
Magneton, level 26- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock (897 EXP.)
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)
Weezing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (963 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 26- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock (495 EXP.)

	Unlock the door to the left for a PROTEIN.  Now that this
floor is cleared, continue up to the 6th.  Fight the Rocket
guarding the north entrance to the main room.

ROCKET $870
Machop, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (546 EXP.)
Machoke, level 29- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (906 EXP.)

	Talk to the people if you want, then fight the Rocket
guarding the south entrance.

ROCKET $840
Zubat, level 28- Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray, Wing Attack (324 EXP.)
Zubat, level 28- Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray, Wing Attack (324 EXP.)
Golbat, level 28- Leech Life, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (1026 EXP.)

	Go to the left of this Rocket, and open up the door for
another item room.  Grab the HP UP and the X ACCURACY.  Fight
the Scientist to the north.

SCIENTIST $1250
Voltorb, level 25- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct (550 EXP.)
Koffing, level 25- Tackle, Smog (610 EXP.)
Magneton, level 25- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock (862 EXP.)
Magnemite, level 25- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock (475 EXP.)
Koffing, level 25- Tackle, Smog (610 EXP.)

	Now head up to the 7th floor.  Challenge the Rocket in
plain view to a duel.

ROCKET $870
Red/Blue:
Cubone, level 29- Growl, Bone Club, Leer (540 EXP.)
Cubone, level 29- Growl, Bone Club, Leer (540 EXP.)
Yellow:
Cubone, level 29- Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt, Leer (540 EXP.)
Cubone, level 29- Bone Club, Tail Whip, Headbutt, Leer (540 EXP.)

	Unlock that door to find TM03:Swords Dance in the southeast
corner of this room, and unlock the next door to fight this
Rocket.

ROCKET $870
Sandshrew, level 29- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting (577 EXP.)
Sandslash, level 29- Scratch, Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting (1012 EXP.)

	Now if you go down the tiny corridor in the middle of the
room and go around, you'll find a CALCIUM and a Scientist.

SCIENTIST $1450
Electrode, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (931 EXP.)
Muk, level 29- Pound, Disable (975 EXP.)

	Go back around and fight the Rocket in the room to the left
of the elevator.

ROCKET $780
Raticate, level 26- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (645 EXP.)
Arbok, level 26- Wrap, Leer, Poison Sting, Bite (819 EXP.)
Koffing, level 26- Tackle, Smog (634 EXP.)
Golbat, level 26- Leech Life, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (952 EXP.)

	Open up the door to the south and talk to the Silph
employees if you want, then head up to the 8th floor.  We're
getting there!  Attack the Rocket east of the stairs here.

ROCKET $780
Raticate, level 26- Tackle, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang (645 EXP.)
Zubat, level 26- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (300 EXP.)
Golbat, level 26- Leech Life, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (952 EXP.)
Rattata, level 26- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (316 EXP.)

	Head down the middle corridor to the next Rocket.

ROCKET $840
Weezing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (1038 EXP.)
Golbat, level 28- Leech Life, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (1026 EXP.)
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)

	Go up the room to the left of this Rocket to another
Scientist.

SCIENTIST $1450
Grimer, level 29- Pound, Disable (558 EXP.)
Electrode, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (931 EXP.)

	Unlocking the door to the left just leads to another Silph
employee.  Head up to the 9th floor now, and unlock the two
doors to the south to face a Scientist.

SCIENTIST $1400
Voltorb, level 28- Tackle, Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct (618 EXP.)
Koffing, level 28- Tackle, Smog (684 EXP.)
Magneton, level 28- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock (966 EXP.)

	After stealing his cash, go around to the other side of the
room and fight the Rocket at the bottom of the middle corridor.

ROCKET $840
Golbat, level 28- Leech Life, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (1026 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 28- Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion, Headbutt (612 EXP.)
Hypno, level 28- Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion, Headbutt (990 EXP.)

	Unlock the door to the left to find a nurse who will let
you rest and completely heal, which I'm sure you'll need by now if
you haven't visited a Poke Center yet!  Go north from the beds,
unlock the door and fight the next Rocket.

ROCKET $840
Drowzee, level 28- Hypnosis, Disable, Confusion, Headbutt (612 EXP.)
Grimer, level 28- Pound, Disable (540 EXP.)
Machop, level 28- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (528 EXP.)

	Go back to the stairs and up to the 10th floor.  Fight the
Scientist right in your face.

SCIENTIST $1450
Magnemite, level 29- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock, Supersonic (552 EXP.)
Koffing, level 29- Tackle, Smog (708 EXP.)

	Unlocking the door to the south leads to a female employee.
Go the southwest part of the floor and fight the Rocket there.

ROCKET $990
Machoke, level 33- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer (1032 EXP.)

	Collect the items: CARBOS, RARE CANDY, and TM26:Earthquake!
Teach it to any compatible physical Pokemon you have; it's a
great Ground-type attack.  Go up to the 11th and final floor!
You can see the Silph Co. President, but there's no way to get
to him from here.  Fight the Rocket to the southeast.


ROCKET $750
Rattata, level 25- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (304 EXP.)
Rattata, level 25- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (304 EXP.)
Zubat, level 25- Screech, Supersonic, Bite, Confuse Ray (288 EXP.)
Rattata, level 25- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Hyper Fang, Focus Energy (304 EXP.)
Ekans, level 25- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (331 EXP.)

	You're finally ready to rescue the President!  Make sure
your Pokemon are in good condition, go down to the 3rd floor,
then head left a little bit from where the Rocket in the center
corridor is.  Take the teleporter near the table.  Wait, who's
that?  It's Gary!

RIVAL Gary $2600
Red/Blue:
Pidgeot, level 37- Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack (1363 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 38- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (764 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 35- Hypnosis, Reflect, Leech Seed, Stun Spore (630 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 35- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1395 EXP.)
Blastoise, level 40- Bubble, Water Gun, Bite, Withdraw (1830 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeot, level 37- Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack (1363 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 38- Tackle, Bite, Dragon Rage, Leer (1741 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 35- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (682 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 35- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1395 EXP.)
Venusaur, level 40- Leech Seed, Vine Whip, Poisonpowder, Razor Leaf (1782 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeot, level 37- Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack (1363 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 38- Reflect, Leech Seed, Stun Spore, Poisonpowder (684 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 35- Tackle, Bite, Dragon Rage, Leer (1675 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 35- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1395 EXP.)
Charizard, level 40- Ember, Leer, Rage, Slash (1806 EXP.)
Yellow:
Sandslash, level 38- Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting, Swift (1326 EXP.)
Magneton, level 35- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock, Supersonic (1142 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 37- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1373 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 35- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1087 EXP.)
Vaporeon, level 40- Water Gun, Quick Attack, Bite, Aurora Beam (1735 EXP.)
OR
Sandslash, level 38- Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting, Swift (1326 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 35- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1335 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 37- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (1609 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 35- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1087 EXP.)
Jolteon, level 40- Thundershock, Quick Attack, Double Kick, Pin Missile (1687
EXP.)
OR
Sandslash, level 38- Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting, Swift (1326 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 35- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (1571 EXP.)
Magneton, level 37- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock, Supersonic (1198 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 35- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1087 EXP.)
Flareon, level 40- Ember, Quick Attack, Bite, Fire Spin (1711 EXP.)

	Gary has sufficiently upgraded his team from the last time
you saw him.  Not only does he have most of his Pokemon fully
evolved, but at high and dangerous levels, especially if your
Pokemon are tired right now.  In Red/Blue, Gary leads off with
his traditional bird- Pidgeot.  Take it down with Electric, Ice,
or any strong attack and hope that it doesn't use Sand-Attack.
For the three different possible Pokemon he could have,
Growlithe, Exeggcute, or Gyarados, Gyarados is the only real
threat.  Alakazam can easily be taken down with a powerful
physical attack like Body Slam or Earthquake, and you should
have by now at least one Pokemon that's super-effective against
Gary's starter: Use Fire, Ice, Ground, Flying, or Psychic attacks on
Venusaur; Water, Electric, or Rock attacks on Charizard, and
Grass or Electric attacks on Blastoise.  In Yellow, Gary leads
off with Sandslash, a similar Pokemon to Pidgeot in that it will
try to lower your Pokemon's accuracy.  Gary's three different
Pokemon teams all have the same three types- Water, Electric,
and Fire.  Use Water, Rock or Ground attacks against the Fire-type;
Grass or Electric against the Water-type and Ground attacks
against the Electric-type.  Use strengths against weaknesses for
this battle, as you should be used to by now, and you'll come
out on top.
	After defeating Gary, talk to the other man in the room and
he gives you a Lapras!  It's at level 15, so it would take some
time to level it up for battling usage, but if you're willing to
try, it can make for a great addition to your team.  Step into
the next teleporter.  This part is a little different between
Red/Blue and Yellow; in Red/Blue there is a lone Rocket guarding
the boss room:

ROCKET $960
Cubone, level 32- Growl, Bone Club, Leer, Focus Energy (595 EXP.)
Drowzee, level 32- Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas, Psychic (699 EXP.)
Marowak, level 32- Growl, Bone Club, Leer, Focus Energy (849 EXP.)

	And Yellow has the final fight with Jessie and James.

ROCKET $930
Weezing, level 31- Tackle, Smog (1149 EXP.)
Arbok, level 31- Leer, Poison Sting, Bite, Glare (976 EXP.)
Meowth, level 31- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (457 EXP.)

	It looks like they'll always be pathetic.  Head south and
unlock the final door to the President's room.  It's Giovanni
again, the leader of Team Rocket, behind it all!  Let's teach
him another lesson, shall we?

GIOVANNI $4059 (uses Guard Spec.)
Red/Blue:
Nidorino, level 37- Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Focus Energy, Fury Attack (934
EXP.)
Kangaskhan, level 35- Comet Punch, Rage, Bite, Tail Whip (1312 EXP.)
Rhyhorn, level 37- Horn Attack, Stomp, Tail Whip (1069 EXP.)
Nidoqueen, level 41- Tackle, Scratch, Poison Sting, Body Slam (1704 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidorino, level 37- Double Kick, Poison Sting, Focus Energy, Fury Attack (934
EXP.)
Persian, level 35- Growl, Bite, Pay Day, Screech (1110 EXP.)
Rhyhorn, level 37- Horn Attack, Stomp, Tail Whip (1069 EXP.)
Nidoqueen, level 41- Tackle, Scratch, Double Kick, Body Slam (1704 EXP.)

	Giovanni is not as difficult as Gary to defeat; mostly
because his team is not as well-balanced and his Pokemon don't
know very strong moves.  There's no real status effects to worry
about, and you can count on Giovanni wasting at least one turn
putting Guard Spec. on one of his Pokemon.  His Nidoqueen may
look intimidating, but it's a Poison-Ground type, meaning it has
weaknesses to Psychic, Ground, Water and Ice attacks.
	With Giovanni defeated, Team Rocket disappears, and Silph
Co. is completely safe once again!  Head north to talk to the
President, and he gives you the MASTER BALL in return for saving
his company.  This is probably the most useful item in the
entire game, because it allows you to capture any Pokemon without
fail.  And you can only use it once.  Hang on to it, or store it in
your PC so you don't accidentally dispose of it!  Use Dig to return
to Saffron and heal up at the Poke Center.  Team Rocket no longer
lurks around the city, so feel free to do a little bit more
exploring before taking on the Saffron City Gym.  In the very
northwest part of the city is a house where a girl who lives on
the second floor will give you TM31:Mimic if you give her a Poke
Doll (found at Celadon City Department Store).

SAFFRON CITY GYM
Style: Psychic
	This is an interesting gym made up of nine different rooms,
which, with the exceptions of the entrance room and the Gym
Leader Sabrina's room, have four teleporters each.  This means
you must find your way through the maze of teleporters to reach
Sabrina in the middle of the gym.  As far as the trainers go,
they're about the same levels as the Fuchsia City Gym, so you
should have more of an advantage this time.  They will use
mostly Psychic-type Pokemon, which have no weaknesses (other than Bug,
which is an almost-completely useless type), so you have to play
by stats to win.  Most Psychic types have low Defense.  Whatever
you do, don't try battling with Fighting or Poison-types in
here; you'll get pummeled!  Here is the list of trainers in the gym
according to the rooms they're in:

Southeast corner:
PSYCHIC $330
Slowpoke, level 33- Disable, Headbutt, Growl, Water Gun (699 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 33- Disable, Headbutt, Growl, Water Gun (699 EXP.)
Slowbro, level 33- Disable, Headbutt, Growl, Water Gun (1159 EXP.)

Southwest corner:
CHANNELER $990
Gastly, level 33- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis (670 EXP.)
Gastly, level 33- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis (670 EXP.)
Haunter, level 33- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis (891 EXP.)

Northeast corner:
PSYCHIC $310
Kadabra, level 31- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (963 EXP.)
Slowpoke, level 31- Confusion, Disable, Headbutt, Growl (657 EXP.)
Mr. Mime, level 31- Confusion, Barrier, Light Screen, Doubleslap (903 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 31- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (963 EXP.)

Northwest corner:
PSYCHIC $380
Slowbro, level 38- Headbutt, Growl, Water Gun, Withdraw (1335 EXP.)

Middle north:
CHANNELER $1020
Gastly, level 34- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis (691 EXP.)
Haunter, level 34- Lick, Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis (918 EXP.)

Middle west:
CHANNELER $1140
Haunter, level 38- Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis, Dream Eater (1026 EXP.)

Middle east:
PSYCHIC $340
Mr. Mime, level 34- Confusion, Barrier, Light Screen, Doubleslap (990 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 34- Confusion, Disable, Psybeam, Recover (1056 EXP.)

	Now to get to Sabrina the fastest way, first take the first
teleporter, then take the northwest teleporter, then the
southwest teleporter, and then the southwest teleporter again.
Save your game and get ready for the fight versus Sabrina, the
Psychic master!

GYM LEADER Sabrina (uses X Defend) TM46:Psywave, Marsh Badge
Red/Blue: $4257
Kadabra, level 38- Disable, Psybeam, Recover, Psychic (1180 EXP.)
Mr. Mime, level 37- Confusion, Barrier, Light Screen, Doubleslap (1077 EXP.)
Venomoth, level 38- Poisonpowder, Leech Life, Stun Spore, Psybeam (1123 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 43- Psywave, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1713 EXP.)
Yellow: $4950
Abra, level 50- Teleport (781 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 50- Psywave, Kinesis, Recover, Psychic (1552 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 50- Psywave, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1992 EXP.)

	In Red/Blue, Sabrina sends out Kadabra first, a mild
threat.  Though you do have to be cautious (a critical-hit Psychic
hurts), you can take down Kadabra pretty quickly and easily.  What
you have to remember with Psychic-type Pokemon is that they
always have high Special stats, which means you should always
avoid attacking them with a special attack since they can resist
it well.  Mr. Mime can build its defenses well, but can't do
much in terms of damage unless it confuses your Pokemon.  Venomoth
can be a pain unless you take it out right away because it can stun
your Pokemon.  Alakazam is what Sabrina's team is based around,
and if it uses Reflect before you have a chance to attack it, it
could be very difficult to take out.  Switch out if your lead
Pokemon is injured before fighting it, and use your best
physical attacks to take it down.  Psywave is a Normal-type attack that
either does little or a moderate amount of damage, but it's not
nearly as threatening as Alakazam's Psychic attack.
	In Yellow, Sabrina has the Abra-Kadabra-Alakazam evolution
cycle, and all at level 50.  Since Abra can't attack, you can
take it out any way you want; the Kadabra likes to use Kinesis
to lower your accuracy before fighting her Alakazam.  The same
rules apply here: Attack with good physical attacks such as Body Slam
or Earthquake to make short work of her Pokemon and not give
them a chance to kill your Pokemon with Psychic.  Kadabra and
Alakazam know Recover, but since it only heals half their full HP, it
should still give you enough time to finish them off.  Again,
Psywave is not a threatening attack, so don't worry about it.
	Defeat Sabrina to gain more cash, the almost-completely-
useless TM46:Psywave and the sixth badge!  Only two more to get
for Pokemon League eligibility.  Return to Fuchsia City; it's
time to do some Surfin.'




________________________________________________________________
	8. Volcano Badge
	If you go south from the Fuchsia Poke Center, you get to a
beach area.  This is the beginning of a long water-journey to
get to the Seafoam Islands, our next destination.  First, however,
let's battle the couple of trainers on the shoreline.

SWIMMER $150
Tentacool, level 30- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (675 EXP.)
Shellder, level 30- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (622 EXP.)

SWIMMER $145
Goldeen, level 29- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (688 EXP.)
Horsea, level 29- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (514 EXP.)
Staryu, level 29- Tackle, Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin (658 EXP.)

	Now let's take a dip in the water and search for some new
Pokemon. Make sure you've stocked up well on Poke Balls and
Great Balls.

ROUTE 19 Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Tentacruel- Rare (R,B,Y)
Horsea- Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Staryu- Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	There's some new important Water Pokemon here you should
try to catch: Tentacool if you haven't (there's plenty of them),
Tentacruel, the evolved form of Tentacool, Horsea, and Staryu.
Tentacool is the only one that can be found Surfing but you can
encounter the other ones while fishing on the shore of the
Seafoam Islands or Fuchsia City as well.
	Basically, Route 19 follows a path that leads south and
then directly west, which is pretty straightforward.  There are
trainers all over the route, and as you might have guessed, they
all use Water Pokemon.  Here is the list of trainers you may
encounter on this route:

SWIMMER $150
Horsea, level 30- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (532 EXP.)
Horsea, level 30- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (532 EXP.)

SWIMMER $150
Poliwag, level 30- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (495 EXP.)
Poliwhirl, level 30- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (841 EXP.)

SWIMMER $145
Goldeen, level 29- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (688 EXP.)
Shellder, level 29- Tackle, Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp (601 EXP.)
Seaking, level 29- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (1056 EXP.)

SWIMMER $135
Horsea, level 27- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (480 EXP.)
Tentacool, level 27- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (607 EXP.)
Tentacool, level 27- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (607 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 27- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (642 EXP.)

SWIMMER $135
Tentacool, level 27- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (607 EXP.)
Tentacool, level 27- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (607 EXP.)
Staryu, level 27- Tackle, Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin (612 EXP.)
Horsea, level 27- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (480 EXP.)
Tentacruel, level 27- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (1185 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2100
Goldeen, level 30- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (712 EXP.)
Seaking, level 30- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (1092 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2030
Staryu, level 29- Tackle, Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin (658 EXP.)
Staryu, level 29- Tackle, Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin (658 EXP.)
Staryu, level 29- Tackle, Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin (658 EXP.)

BEAUTY $1890
Poliwag, level 27- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (445 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 27- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (642 EXP.)
Seaking, level 27- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (982 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 27- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (642 EXP.)
Poliwag, level 27- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (445 EXP.)

SWIMMER $140
Horsea, level 28- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (498 EXP.)
Horsea, level 28- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (498 EXP.)
Seadra, level 28- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (930 EXP.)
Horsea, level 28- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer (498 EXP.)

SWIMMER $155
Shellder, level 31- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (643 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 31- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (1348 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2100
Seadra, level 30- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (996 EXP.)
Horsea, level 30- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (532 EXP.)
Seadra, level 30- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (996 EXP.)

	Once you land on the island, there's one more trainer to
the southwest of the cave entrance.

BEAUTY $2450
Seaking, level 35- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (1275 EXP.)

	Enter the cave.  This is Seafoam Islands; home of many new
Pokemon, including the second of three legendary birds.  You
won't find any trainers here, but the cave itself is a maze with
tricky boulder-pushing puzzles you'll need Strength for.  It's
very helpful, if you get lost, to bring along a Pokemon that
knows Dig, so you can quickly exit out of the cave back to a
Poke Center, or to have an Escape Rope with you.

SEAFOAM ISLANDS Wild Pokemon:
Land:
Zubat- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Golbat- Common (R,B,Y)
Psyduck- Common (R,B)
Golduck- Rare (R,B)
Slowpoke- Common (R,B,Y)
Slowbro- Rare (R,B,Y)
Seel- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Dewgong- Common (R,B,Y)
Shellder- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Kingler- Common (R,B,Y)
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Tentacruel- Rare (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Kingler- Common (R,B,Y)
Horsea- Common (R,B,Y)
Seadra- Rare (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Seaking- Common (R,B,Y)
Staryu- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	The Seafoam Islands are home of a great variety of Water-
type Pokemon, so take the time here to collect as many as you
can.  Golduck, Seel, Dewgong, Kingler, Horsea, and Seadra are
the particularly interesting finds here.  To start off from the
entrance, go to the right where you can see a boulder.  Simply
use Strength, push the boulder into the nearby hole, and fall in
after it.  Do this twice more to the same boulder, and on the
third time you'll fall into a running river.  This current is
strong and you won't be able to stop it until you've pushed two
boulders into the river to stop the current. There are two river
currents in the Seafoam Islands; this current blocks the rout
that leads to the exit and the other blocks the rout that leads
to Articuno.
	Fish around for some Pokemon in the water where you land,
and there's an ULTRA BALL hidden in the single square of land to
the southeast.  Surf up to where you climb back onto land, then
go left and south on the land mass and climb the ladder you see.
On this next floor, if you want you can take the ladder to the
south up and press A next to the strange rock to the right to
get a NUGGET.  Return to the other floor and go around the land mass
to a boulder puzzle.  Press A next to the first lonely strange
rock to get a MAX ELIXER.  There are four boulders and two
holes; your objective is to get two boulders out of the way so you can
push the other two into their respective holes.  Push the
boulder to the far east all the way up, then push the one next to it
one south, one west and stop. Go around the hole and push the other
boulder all the way to the left.  Now you can easily push both
the boulders into their respective holes.  Jump down one of the
holes and you'll find that this current is blocked!  Surf up to
the small island and you'll notice a stand-alone bird Pokemon.
This is Articuno, the second of the three legendary birds!  Save
your game right now and let's capture it!
	Articuno is probably the most valuable of the legendary
birds because it's an Ice/Flying-type, and Ice attacks are very
valuable in the battles to come.  It's also extremely difficult
to catch, like Zapdos.  Begin the battle by Paralyzing it, or
waiting until its health is low enough so you can put it to
sleep.  Articuno itself resists Ice attacks, so you can't Freeze
it.  Wittle down its health and be sure not to kill it if it's
in the red, then start throwing Great Balls.  This may in fact
be a good time to use your Master Ball if you wish; some people
prefer to wait but Articuno's freezing attacks will greatly aid
you in capturing later strong Pokemon.
	After capturing it, all you have to do now is find a way
out.  Now you have to go all the way back to the top of Seafoam
by taking the ladders back up to get to that other boulder.
Head back to land to the south and take the first ladder up, take
this next ladder to the south up, go northeast from this ladder and
take the next one up, then go southwest and around to take the
ladder up on the little land mass.  From this ladder go east and
you'll spot the last boulder next to its hole.  Just like you
did with the first one, push it in the holes and keep jumping in
after it until it's you've landed in the water.  Since this
current is now blocked, you can now go on the land mass to your
right.  Simply go up the ladders and exit the island!

ROUTE 20 Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Tentacruel- Rare (R,B,Y)
Horsea- Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Staryu- Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	You are now on Route 20, and Cinnabar Island, home of the
seventh gym, is to our left.  The water path is obvious, but as
usual, there are trainers about!  Here is the list of trainers
you'll encounter on this sea rout:

JR. TRAINER(f) $600
Tentacool, level 30- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (675 EXP.)
Horsea, level 30- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (532 EXP.)
Seel, level 30- Headbutt, Growl (642 EXP.)

SWIMMER $175
Staryu, level 35- Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin, Swift (795 EXP.)

BIRD KEEPER $750
Fearow, level 30- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (1041 EXP.)
Fearow, level 30- Growl, Leer, Fury Attack, Mirror Move (1041 EXP.)
Pidgeotto, level 30- Gust, Sand-Attack, Quick Attack, Whirlwind (726 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2100
Shellder, level 30- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (622 EXP.)
Shellder, level 30- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam
(622 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 30- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (1305 EXP.)

JR. TRAINER(f) $620
Goldeen, level 31- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (736 EXP.)
Seaking, level 31- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (1128 EXP.)

BEAUTY $2170
Poliwag, level 31- Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap, Body Slam (511 EXP.)
Seaking, level 31- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (1128 EXP.)

	When you reach Cinnabar Island, take a rest at the Poke
Center and explore good selections at the next-door Poke Mart.

Cinnabar Island Poke Mart:
Ultra Ball- $1200
Great Ball- $600
Hyper Potion- $1500
Max Repel- $700
Escape Rope- $550
Full Heal- $600
Revive- $1500

CINNABAR ISLAND Wild Pokemon:
Water:
Slowpoke- Common (R,B,Y)
Shellder- Common (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Horsea- Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Staryu- Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	Now to the left of the Poke Center is the Pokemon Lab where
ancient and rare Pokemon are studied exclusively.  There are
several rooms to your right.  In Red/Blue, the woman offers to
trade her Tangela for a Venonat, and the man his Electrode for
your Raichu.  In Yellow, the woman will offer to trade her
Dewgong for a Growlithe and the man offers his Rhydon for your
Golduck.  Both the Tangela and Rhydon offers are good trades.
In the second room, the scientist in the northeast corner gives you
TM35:Metronome, which is a fun attack to try out on one of your
Pokemon not on your battling team.  In the third room, the
scientist at the table offers to trade his Seel for your Ponyta
in Red/Blue and his Muk for your Kangaskhan in Yellow.  Ignore
him.  The other scientist in the room is the real reason we are
at this lab!  Do you remember the Helix and Dome Fossils from
Mt. Moon?  Take whichever one you chose and give it to this doctor.
Leave the lab and return back to him, and he'll give you a
prehistoric Pokemon unobtainable anywhere else!  If you give him
the Helix Fossil you get Omanyte, and if you give him the Dome
Fossil you get Kabuto.
	There is also one more prehistoric Pokemon you can get the
good doctor to make for you, but to get the item you need to
take a trip back to Pewter City.  Use a bird to Fly over there, and
head to the north where the Museum is.  If you go to the very
northeast of the city, you'll spot a gap in the ledge.  Walk up
the gap, use Cut on the tree blocking your way, and head left to
a secret research building.  Talk to the scientist next to the
plaque to receive OLD AMBER.  Now if you Fly back to the lab in
Cinnabar, the scientist there will transform the Old Amber into
an Aerodactyl!
          Now back to business.  If you go to the Cinnabar Gym,
the doors are locked, and you don't have a key.  The key we are
searching for is in the Pokemon Mansion, which is the large building
to the left of the gym. Enter it.

POKeMON MANSION Wild Pokemon:
Rattata- Very Common (Y)
Raticate- Common (Y)
Vulpix- Very Common (B,Y)
Growlithe- Common (R,Y)
Ponyta- Common (R,B)
Grimer- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Muk- Common (R,B,Y)
Koffing- Common (R,B)
Weezing- Rare (R,B)
Magmar- Common (B)
Ditto- Rare (Y)

	The Seafoam Islands were home of all the Water-types; now
you get your full taste of Fire and Poison-types in the Pokemon
Mansion.  Be sure to catch Grimer, Muk, Koffing and Weezing in
Red/Blue, and to get all the available new Fire-types.  The Blue
version is especially plentiful here, what with Vulpix and
Magmar exclusive to it.  There are also little paper notes scattered
around the Mansion containing information on two very important
Pokemon and are interesting to read about.
	Let's look around in the first big room.  Going northeast
past the first stairs leads to an ESCAPE ROPE.  Now go to the
small room to the left.  In here is a statue; these statues are
all over Pokemon Mansion and open and close the sliding doors
you'll see.  They are not confusing to work with, since each
statue only changes the doors in the floor you're in.  It's
simple: If you come across a closed door, just go back to the
statue on the floor you're on and flip the switch.  Since
there's nothing of importance on this floor, however, just go up the
stairs to the 2nd floor.
	Directly south of these stairs is a Burglar.  Talk to him
to get him to fight you.

BURGLAR $3060
Charmander, level 34- Ember, Leer, Rage, Slash (472 EXP.)
Charmeleon, level 34- Ember, Leer, Rage, Slash (1033 EXP.)

	Take the stairs right next to the other stairs up to get to
a secret room and another Burglar.

BURGLAR $3420
Ninetales, level 38- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1449 EXP.)

	There are two tiny paths in this room.  Press A next to the
dead end of the top one to get a MAX REVIVE, and the item in the
south path is a MAX POTION.  Return to the other floor.  Head to
the very east part of the room and grab the CALCIUM in the
eastern corner.  Flipping the switch doesn't give access to any
rooms with extra items (except a paper note), so when you're
ready, head up the stairs that's in the room directly north of
the other two staircases.
	Head all the way east from these stairs to get IRON in the
eastern room.  Return and flip the statue switch, then go
through the south door this time.  Challenge the Scientist here.

SCIENTIST $1650
Magnemite, level 33- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock, Supersonic (628 EXP.)
Magneton, level 33- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock, Supersonic (1138 EXP.)
Voltorb, level 33- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (727 EXP.)

	The staircase past the Scientist just leads to an empty
room, so don't go there.  There are two ledges next to the
Scientist; you want to go down the left-hand one.  There's a
Scientist right near where you land.

SCIENTIST $1450
Electrode, level 29- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (931 EXP.)
Weezing, level 29- Tackle, Smog (1074 EXP.)

	Take the CARBOS in between the row of plants and take the
stairs you see down.  Head up from the stairs and enter the room
on your left; fight the Burglar in here.

BURGLAR $3060
Growlithe, level 34- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (663 EXP.)
Ponyta, level 34- Ember, Tail Whip, Stomp (1107 EXP.)

	Be sure to get the item next to the statue here; it's the
very powerful TM14:Blizzard!  Teach it to a compatible Pokemon
if you can, but don't overwrite Ice Beam in favor of it.  Flip the
statue switch and head out the left side of the room.  Get the
FULL RESTORE on the left wall and go back to the right side of
the room, then up through the now-open door.  There's one more
Scientist to the north.

SCIENTIST $1700
Magnemite, level 34- Tackle, Sonicboom, Thundershock, Supersonic (648 EXP.)
Electrode, level 34- Screech, Sonicboom, Selfdestruct, Light Screen (1092 EXP.)

	The next switch is in the room to north; flip it and then
grab the RARE CANDY in the room to the left of it.  Head left,
get TM22:Solarbeam on the table if you want, and go south to
finally get the SECRET KEY!  This will unlock the Cinnabar
Island Gym doors.  To exit, either use Dig or Escape Rope for the easy
way out, or head back to the statue in the room with the
Blizzard TM, flip that switch then head back upstairs and north to the
exit.  Take a stop by the Poke Center if you need to, then enter
the gym!

CINNABAR ISLAND GYM
Style: Fire
	The Cinnabar Island Gym follows a different format from the
others; you will advance one room at a time, and in each room
you are given a quiz question from the control panel.  They're
mostly pretty simple, but there are a couple trick questions.  If you
answer correctly, the door opens and you don't have to fight the
trainer.  If you answer incorrectly, you have to battle.  Of
course, it's best to just battle the trainers anyway to gain
experience, but that's up to you.
	All the trainers and the Gym Leader, Blaine, use Fire-type
Pokemon.  This means if you have a well-established Water-type,
Ground-type, or Rock-type (or any Pokemon that knows a good
attack of that type), that Pokemon can easily sweep the gym.
Besides that, all you need to know is that Fire-types generally
have strong Attack stats, so don't send in any Grass or Ice
types against them.  Even if you do get Burned, it doesn't damage you
outside of battle, so don't be too worried if it happens.  For
this Gym guide, I will supply each room with the correct quiz
answer and the trainer inside.

Q1: YES

BURGLAR $3240
Growlithe, level 36- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (702 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 36- Quick Attack, Roar, Confuse Ray, Flamethrower (486 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 36- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1372 EXP.)

	There's an extra trainer here in the next room.  You can
either ignore him or battle him.

SUPER NERD $900
Vulpix, level 36- Quick Attack, Roar, Confuse Ray, Flamethrower (486 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 36- Quick Attack, Roar, Confuse Ray, Flamethrower (486 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 36- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1372 EXP.)

Q2: NO

SUPER NERD $850
Ponyta, level 34- Ember, Tail Whip, Stomp (1107 EXP.)
Charmander, level 34- Ember, Leer, Rage, Slash (472 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 34- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar, Confuse Ray (459 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 34- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (663 EXP.)

Q3: NO

BURGLAR $3690
Ponyta, level 41- Tail Whip, Stomp, Growl, Fire Spin (1335 EXP.)

Q4: NO

SUPER NERD $1025
Rapidash, level 41- Tail Whip, Stomp, Growl, Fire Spin (1686 EXP.)

Q5: YES

BURGLAR $3330
Vulpix, level 37- Quick Attack, Roar, Confuse Ray, Flamethrower (499 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 37- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (721 EXP.)

Q6: NO

SUPER NERD $925
Growlithe, level 37- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (721 EXP.)
Vulpix, level 37- Quick Attack, Roar, Confuse Ray, Flamethrower (499 EXP.)

	After the sixth room, you've reached Blaine!

GYM LEADER Blaine $4653 (uses Super Potion) TM38:Fire Blast, Volcano Badge
Red/Blue: $4653
Growlithe, level 42- Ember, Leer, Take Down, Agility (819 EXP.)
Ponyta, level 40- Tail Whip, Stomp, Growl, Fire Spin (1302 EXP.)
Rapidash, level 42- Tail Whip, Stomp, Growl, Fire Spin (1728 EXP.)
Arcanine, level 47- Roar, Ember, Take Down, Fire Blast (2145 EXP.)
Yellow: $5346
Ninetales, level 48- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Confuse Ray, Flamethrower (1830
EXP.)
Rapidash, level 50- Stomp, Growl, Fire Spin, Take Down (2056 EXP.)
Arcanine, level 54- Take Down, Reflect, Flamethrower, Fire Blast (2464 EXP.)

	In Red/Blue, Blaine sends out two pretty weak Fire-types,
Growlithe and Ponyta, which should be easily disposed of with
any Pokemon in your party.  Rapidash is a powerful Pokemon, but Fire
Spin is not a very powerful Fire attack- don't be too
aggressive; Blaine doesn't have any real weapons until he sends out
his Arcanine.  One Fire Blast from Arcanine can easily wipe out any
non-Water-type you're using, so save your best Pokemon to use
against it.  Surf, Earthquake, and Rock Slide are great moves
that should be used to take it out.  If you're lucky, Arcanine
may try to Roar you to death, and that does nothing.
	In Yellow the going is considerably tougher with Blaine's
three evolved Fire-types, but only if you don't have a Pokemon
super-effective against Fire.  Ninetales is a much greater
threat than Rapidash due to its powerful Flamethrower and annoying
Confuse Ray, so if one of your Pokemon gets confused, you may
have to switch out.  Again, Arcanine has a very strong Fire
Blast, but it's completely useless against Water-types.
Remember, even if you think you have a winning battle going, be
cautious: Blaine's Pokemon have strong Attack stats, so Take
Down can do considerable damage to any of your Pokemon.
	Defeating Blaine gives you the Volcano Badge, and you have
just one more to get before you can enter the Pokemon League!
If you have a Charizard or Arcanine of your own, you can teach it
Fire Blast if you want, but Flamethrower works just as well.






________________________________________________________________
	9. Earth Badge
	We only have one badge to go, but we've explored just about
all of Kanto!  If you remember all the way back in Viridian
City, the gym was locked.  However, with your victory over Blaine, the
leader of that gym has returned and it's no longer locked!
Let's stop by Pallet Town though first, shall we?  Start Surfing on
the rout north of Cinnabar.

ROUTE 21 Wild Pokemon:
Land:
Pidgey- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Pidgeotto- Common (R,B,Y)
Rattata- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Raticate- Common (R,B,Y)
Tangela- Common (R,B)
Water:
Tentacool- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Tentacruel- Rare (R,B,Y)
Horsea- Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Staryu- Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	Like Route 20, Route 21 is very straightforward; it leads
straight up towards your hometown.  Near the top, right below
Pallet, is a patch of grass on a little island that's the only
spot in the game where Tangela is catchable in the wild in
Red/Blue.  As usual, here are the trainers littering this route
(there are a few Fisherman on a couple fishing piers):

SWIMMER $165
Staryu, level 33- Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin, Swift (748 EXP.)
Wartortle, level 33- Bubble, Water Gun, Bite, Withdraw (1011 EXP.)

SWIMMER $160
Poliwhirl, level 32- Bubble, Hypnosis, Water Gun, Doubleslap (897 EXP.)

Tentacool, level 32- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (720 EXP.)
Seadra, level 32- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (1062 EXP.)

SWIMMER $185
Starmie, level 37- Tackle, Water Gun, Harden, Rapid Spin (1641 EXP.)

FISHERMAN $1155
Seaking, level 33- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (1201 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 33- Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack, Fury Attack (784 EXP.)

FISHERMAN $1085
Shellder, level 31- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (643 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 31- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (1348 EXP.)

SWIMMER $165
Seadra, level 33- Bubble, Smokescreen, Leer, Water Gun (1095 EXP.)
Tentacruel, level 33- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (1449 EXP.)

CUE BALL $775
Tentacool, level 31- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (697 EXP.)
Tentacool, level 31- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (697 EXP.)
Tentacruel, level 31- Wrap, Poison Sting, Water Gun, Constrict (1360 EXP.)

FISHERMAN $945
Magikarp, level 27- Splash, Tackle (115 EXP.)

Magikarp, level 27- Splash, Tackle (115 EXP.)
Magikarp, level 27- Splash, Tackle (115 EXP.)
Magikarp, level 27- Splash, Tackle (115 EXP.)
Magikarp, level 27- Splash, Tackle (115 EXP.)
Magikarp, level 27- Splash, Tackle (115 EXP.)

FISHERMAN $980
Seaking, level 28- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (1020 EXP.)
Goldeen, level 28- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (666 EXP.)
Seaking, level 28- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (1020 EXP.)
Seaking, level 28- Peck, Tail Whip, Supersonic, Horn Attack (1020 EXP.)

	When you make landfall, walk around and visit your mom,
have Professor Oak evaluate your Pokedex progress if you want (you
should have a sizeable collection by this time), then either Fly
or ride your bike north to Viridian.  Enter the now-unlocked
gym.

VIRIDIAN CITY GYM
	Style: Ground
	The technical style of the gym may be Ground, but in
reality, this gym is very unpredictable; you'll face many
different types going against the trainers here, mostly
including Poison, Ground, and Fighting-types.  Your team should
consist of at least four or five different types of Pokemon by now,
and at levels 45-50 at the very least.  This gym is a good test of how
you've balanced your party; if you can defeat every trainer
including the leader in one go, you're doing well.
	The gym has familiar-looking sliding floors you've seen
from the Team Rocket hideouts.  No one around knows who the Gym
Leader is; can you guess?  Take one of the sliding floors left at the
start and battle the first trainer here.

TAMER $1560
Arbok, level 39- Poison Sting, Bite, Glare, Screech (1228 EXP.)
Tauros, level 39- Tackle, Stomp, Tail Whip, Leer (1762 EXP.)

	Take the sliding floor to the left of him up and challenge
the next trainer.

BLACKBELT $1075
Machoke, level 43- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (1344 EXP.)


	Go around the skinny wall to your right to battle the next
trainer.

TAMER $1365
Red/Blue:
Nidorino, level 39- Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Focus Energy, Fury Attack (985
EXP.)
Nidoking, level 39- Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Thrash (1629 EXP.)
Yellow:
Nidorino, level 39- Double Kick, Poison Sting, Focus Energy, Fury Attack (985
EXP.)
Nidoking, level 39- Horn Attack, Double Kick, Poison Sting, Thrash (1629 EXP.)

	Now if you head down and go right you'll come to the main
middle section of the gym.  There are three trainers in a row
here, facing back and forth.

TAMER $1365
Sandslash, level 39- Sand-Attack, Slash, Poison Sting, Swift (1362 EXP.)
Dugtrio, level 39- Growl, Dig, Sand-Attack, Slash (1278 EXP.)

BLACKBELT $1000
Machop, level 40- Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy, Seismic Toss (753 EXP.)
Machoke, level 40- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy
 (1251 EXP.)

TAMER $1720
Rhyhorn, level 43- Horn Attack, Stomp, Tail Whip, Fury Attack (1243 EXP.)

	The item ball to the right (directly above the down arrow)
is a REVIVE.  Challenge the trainer in the little corridor to
the north of it.

COOLTRAINER(m) $1505
Rhyhorn, level 43- Horn Attack, Stomp, Tail Whip, Fury Attack (1243 EXP.)

	Head left of him and fight the Blackbelt against the north
wall.

BLACKBELT $950
Machoke, level 38- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (1188 EXP.)
Machop, level 38- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (715 EXP.)
Machoke, level 38- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (1188 EXP.)

	Now that the Blackbelt is out of the way, you can head
across the far north corridor.  Go back to the entrance and,
hugging the east wall, go up to the northeast corner of the gym.
Simply follow the corridor to the left and you've found the
leader of the Viridian City Gym!  Don't be too surprised when
you discover who it is:

GYM LEADER Giovanni (uses Guard Spec.) TM27:Fissure, Earth Badge
Red/Blue: $4950
Rhyhorn, level 45- Stomp, Tail Whip, Fury Attack, Horn Drill (1300 EXP.)
Dugtrio, level 42- Growl, Dig, Sand-Attack, Slash (1377 EXP.)
Nidoqueen, level 44- Scratch, Poison Sting, Tail Whip, Body Slam (1828 EXP.)
Nidoking, level 45- Tackle, Horn Attack, Poison Sting, Thrash (1879 EXP.)
Rhydon, level 50- Stomp, Tail Whip, Fissure, Horn Drill (2185 EXP.)
Yellow: $5445
Dugtrio, level 50- Dig, Sand-Attack, Fissure, Earthquake (1638 EXP.)
Persian, level 53- Double Team, Screech, Fury Swipes, Slash (1680 EXP.)
Nidoqueen, level 53- Double Kick, Tail Whip, Thunder, Earthquake (2202 EXP.)
Nidoking, level 55- Leer, Double Kick, Thunder, Earthquake (2298 EXP.)
Rhydon, level 55- Fury Attack, Rock Slide, Horn Drill, Earthquake (2403 EXP.)

	Yes, Giovanni from Team Rocket has returned to his gym, and
now you are facing him for the third and final time.  In
Red/Blue, it won't be too difficult to put to rest Team Rocket's
leader, given that Giovanni tends to like to waste turns with
moves like Tail Whip and Growl, and using Guard Spec.  His
Rhyhorn and Rhydon also use Horn Drill, a one-hit KO move, but
it only ever has a chance of working if 1: He attacks first or 2:
You're using a Normal or Fighting-type.  Even then it only works
30% of the time!  This and the fact that all of Giovanni's
Pokemon are Ground, Rock/Ground or Poison/Ground, makes the
battle a lot easier.  Water, Grass, and Ice-types all have a
major advantage.
	In Yellow, Giovanni threatens to pound your units into the
earth with Earthquake, so Flying-types (Articuno works best) are
a big necessity unless you can attack their weaknesses before
they hit you.  Dugtrio only knows Ground-type moves, so he's
helpless against a Flying-type.  Persian can be annoying if you
let it use Double Team enough; use a Rock Pokemon if you have
one, or a Fighting type to quickly knock it out.  Nidoqueen and
Nidoking are the trickiest of Giovanni's minions, because not
only do they know Earthquake, but also Thunder to take out your
Flying-types.  Fortunately, they are weak to many different
types, including Ground, Psychic, Water, and Ice.  Using Flying-
types is still a good option, because Thunder is not the most
accurate attack.  Rhydon has super-powerful Attack stats, and
it's not wise to use Flying-types against it (because Rock Slide
will quickly take them out).  Thankfully, it has a huge weakness
to Water, Grass, and Ice-types, and can be taken out with one
hit
 easily by a strong attack from one of those types.  The key to
remember is to try to take out Giovanni's Pokemon as quickly as
possible, or else let his Pokemon pound on you with their strong
attacks.  Attack his weaknesses mercilessly and don't let up to
take care of the Team Rocket Boss for good!
	Talk to Giovanni after the battle and he'll explain how
Team Rocket is finished, and he is now gone forever- and with that,
he teleports away, never to be seen again.  That's not important to
you, however; you've got all eight badges!   Next stop: Pokemon
League.





________________________________________________________________
	10. Pokemon League
	Head left from Viridian City to Route 22, where if you
remember, you battled Gary very early in the game.  Surprise,
surprise!  He shows his face again!  Prepare for yet another
heated battle against your dreaded Rival.

RIVAL Gary $3445
Red/Blue:
Pidgeot, level 47- Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack, Agility (1731 EXP.)
Rhyhorn, level 45- Stomp, Tail Whip, Fury Attack, Horn Drill (1300 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 45- Ember, Leer, Take Down, Agility (871 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 47- Leech Seed, Stun Spore, Poisonpowder, Solarbeam (984 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 50- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1992 EXP.)
Blastoise, level 53- Bite, Withdraw, Skull Bash, Hydro Pump (2409 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeot, level 47- Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack, Agility (1731 EXP.)
Rhyhorn, level 45- Stomp, Tail Whip, Fury Attack, Horn Drill (1300 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 45- Bite, Dragon Rage, Leer, Hydro Pump (2062 EXP.)
Growlithe, level 47- Ember, Leer, Take Down, Agility (916 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 50- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1992 EXP.)
Venusaur, level 53- Vine Whip, Poisonpowder, Razor Leaf, Growth (2361 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeot, level 47- Quick Attack, Whirlwind, Wing Attack, Agility (1731 EXP.)
Rhyhorn, level 45- Stomp, Tail Whip, Fury Attack, Horn Drill (1300 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 45- Leech Seed, Stun Spore, Poisonpowder, Solarbeam (945 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 47- Bite, Dragon Rage, Leer, Hydro Pump (2109 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 50- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1992 EXP.)
Charizard, level 53- Leer, Rage, Slash, Flamethrower (2385 EXP.)
Yellow:
Sandslash, level 47- Slash, Poison Sting, Swift, Fury Swipes (1641 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 45- Leech Seed, Stun Spore, Poisonpowder, Solarbeam (945 EXP.)
Magneton, level 45- Sonicboom, Thundershock, Supersonic, Thunder Wave (1342
EXP.)
Ninetales, level 47- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1753 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 50- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1552 EXP.)
Vaporeon, level 53- Aurora Beam, Haze, Acid Armor, Hydro Pump (2284 EXP.)
OR
Sandslash, level 47- Slash, Poison Sting, Swift, Fury Swipes (1641 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 45- Leech Seed, Stun Spore, Poisonpowder, Solarbeam (945 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 45- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1716 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 47- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (2044 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 50- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1552 EXP.)
Jolteon, level 53- Pin Missile, Thunder Wave, Agility, Thunder (2236 EXP.)
OR
Sandslash, level 47- Slash, Poison Sting, Swift, Fury Swipes (1641 EXP.)
Exeggcute, level 45- Leech Seed, Stun Spore, Poisonpowder, Solarbeam (945 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 45- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (1996 EXP.)
Magneton, level 47- Thundershock, Supersonic, Thunder Wave, Swift (1398 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 50- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (1552 EXP.)
Flareon, level 53- Fire Spin, Smog, Leer, Flamethrower (2260 EXP.)

	Gary's amazing versatility is a wonder to behold.  Almost
every major type represented in his team, Gary can be tough to
handle if your Pokemon are not well-rounded as well.  The only
major difference between versions is his lead-off Pokemon: In
Red/Blue, it's his Pidgeot, and in Yellow it's his Sandslash.
Both are actually easier to handle this time around because
they've forgotten Sand-Attack.  After that you'll face a barrage
of different types of Pokemon you need to individually analyze
and exploit the weaknesses of.  In Red/Blue, it's Rock/Ground,
Water, Grass, Fire, and Psychic-types, and in Yellow, it's
Grass, Water, Fire, Electric, and Psychic-types.  Use Water/Grass/Ice
versus Rock, Electric/Grass versus Water, Fire/Ice versus Grass,
Water/Ground/Rock versus Fire, Ground versus Electric, and
Normal attacks versus Psychic.
	Gary is an excellent meter for yourself so you can judge
how prepared you are for the Pokemon League.  If you have a party of
4-6 balanced Normal and Special-type Pokemon around level 50 at
least, you're doing well.  If not, then keep going anyway,
because the upcoming Victory Road offers a perfect chance to
train up with the strong Wild Pokemon.
	After the duel, you can now proceed west to the Pokemon
League front gates!  What follows is walking through several
areas, at eight stops giving the police officer your Badge, and
then proceeding onward.  After the Rainbow Badge guard, you are
made to cross the water where you can fish for powerful Pokemon,
and near the exit are grasses full of other rare Pokemon and
capturing opportunities.  Remember, with the Super Rod, you'll
find more evolved Pokemon.

ROUTE 23 Wild Pokemon:
Land:
Spearow- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Fearow- Common (R,B,Y)
Ekans- Very Common (R)
Arbok- Common (R)
Sandshrew- Very Common (B,Y)
Sandslash- Common (B,Y)
Nidoran(f)- Common (Y)
Nidorina- Very Common (Y)
Nidoran(m)- Common (Y)
Nidorino- Very Common (Y)
Mankey- Very Common (Y)
Primeape- Rare (Y)
Ditto- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Water:
Poliwag- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Poliwhirl- Common (R,B,Y)
Slowpoke- Common (R,B,Y)
Slowbro- Rare (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Kingler- Common (R,B,Y)
Horsea- Common (R,B,Y)
Seadra- Rare (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Common (R,B,Y)
Seaking- Rare (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	The final guard stands right next to Victory Road entrance.
Give him the Earth Badge and he'll let you through.  Get
prepared for the toughest stretch of the game; make sure you've stocked
up on healing and restoration items!

VICTORY ROAD Wild Pokemon:
Zubat- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Golbat- Common (R,B,Y)
Venomoth- Common (R,B)
Machop- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Machoke- Common (R,B,Y)
Geodude- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Graveler- Common (R,B,Y)
Onix- Common (R,B,Y)
Marowak- Rare (R,B)

	As you can see, Graveler and Machoke are two must-catches
in this area, as well as one more legendary Pokemon we'll discover
later.  To begin with, you need to push that boulder you see all
the way to the right onto a switch, which will unblock one of
the passageways.  Push the boulder one down, all the way right, two
up, all the way right, two up, one right and one down.  Now go
back to the left and walk on the now unblocked land mass to the
right.  At the intersection, go to the right and follow the
passageway up; there are a couple cool items here.  The one on
the right is TM43:Sky Attack and the one on the left is a RARE
CANDY.  You'll have to exit and re-enter the cave to get both
items.  Head back to the intersection, go left and battle the
trainer.  Be wary: There are strong trainers here!

COOLTRAINER(f) $1540
Persian, level 44- Bite, Pay Day, Screech, Fury Swipes (1395 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 44- Ember, Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Roar (1677 EXP.)

	Go past this trainer and up the passage to encounter
another one.

COOLTRAINER(m) $1470
Ivysaur, level 42- Vine Whip, Poisonpowder, Razor Leaf, Growth (1269 EXP.)
Wartortle, level 42- Water Gun, Bite, Withdraw, Skull Bash (1287 EXP.)
Charmeleon, level 42- Leer, Rage, Slash, Flamethrower (1278 EXP.)
Charizard, level 42- Ember, Leer, Rage, Slash (1881 EXP.)

	Go up the ladder next to him to the 2nd floor.  Go south
and push this boulder one down, one left, one down, and left onto
the switch.  Head up onto the land mass and fight the trainer here.

BLACKBELT $1075
Machoke, level 43- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (1344 EXP.)
Machop, level 43- Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy, Seismic Toss (810 EXP.)
Machoke, level 43- Karate Chop, Low Kick, Leer, Focus Energy (1344 EXP.)

	Continue walking along the land mass to another trainer on
your right.

JUGGLER $1435
Drowzee, level 41- Headbutt, Poison Gas, Psychic, Meditate (895 EXP.)
Hypno, level 41- Confusion, Headbutt, Poison Gas, Psychic (1449 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 41- Disable, Psybeam, Recover, Psychic (1273 EXP.)
Kadabra, level 41- Disable, Psybeam, Recover, Psychic (1273 EXP.)

	Exit the land mass south and walk right, then up along the
right wall, left and battle the trainer in the middle of this
small space.

TAMER $1760
Persian, level 44- Bite, Pay Day, Screech, Fury Swipes (1395 EXP.)
Golduck, level 44- Scratch, Tail Whip, Disable, Confusion (1639 EXP.)

	Take the FULL HEAL next to him then if you want you can go
up and around the rock face to battle another trainer...

JUGGLER $1680
Mr. Mime, level 48- Light Screen, Doubleslap, Meditate, Substitute (1398 EXP.)

	...and take TM17:Submission next to him.  Head back around
the rock face and up the ladder in plain sight to the 3rd floor.
Battle the trainer northeast of this ladder.

COOLTRAINER(m) $1505
Exeggutor, level 43- Barrage, Hypnosis, Stomp (1953 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 43- Withdraw, Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam (1870 EXP.)
Arcanine, level 43- Ember, Leer, Take Down, Agility (1962 EXP.)

	The item next to him is a useful MAX REVIVE.  Ignoring the
boulder, go all the way to the left north of the land mass. Take
the ladder down in this little room to get to a secret area!
Battle the trainer here.

POKeMANIAC $2000
Charmeleon, level 40- Ember, Leer, Rage, Slash (1216 EXP.)
Lapras, level 40- Mist, Body Slam, Confuse Ray, Ice Beam (1876 EXP.)
Lickitung, level 40- Disable, Defense Curl, Slam, Screech (1087 EXP.)

	To the right on the north wall is a GUARD SPEC., and more
importantly, south of that is the third and final legendary bird
Moltres!  Unlike the other two birds, it's not particularly
helpful in the Pokemon League, but you should still capture it
and add it to your collection.  It's just as hard to capture as
Zapdos and Articuno, however, so make sure you brought some
Great Balls!  See the above strategies on how to get it.  Now return
to the other floor and head all the way back to the right where the
boulder is.  Push the boulder two up and left to the wall, then
stop and pick up TM47:Explosion to the south.  Push the boulder
one down, four left, three down and one right onto the switch.
Again, return all the way to the right and now you can traverse
the unblocked land mass to the left.  Fight the female trainer
in the way.

COOLTRAINER(f) $1505
Parasect, level 43- Stun Spore, Leech Life, Spore, Slash (1179 EXP.)
Dewgong, level 43- Headbutt, Growl, Aurora Beam (1621 EXP.)
Chansey, level 43- Doubleslap, Sing, Growl, Minimize (2349 EXP.)

	Follow the winding path southwest, then exit the land mass
south and fight the couple of trainers to the east (if you still
have the energy).

COOLTRAINER(m) $1505
Kingler, level 43- Vicegrip, Guillotine, Stomp, Crabhammer (1897 EXP.)
Tentacruel, level 43- Water Gun, Constrict, Barrier, Screech (1888 EXP.)
Blastoise, level 43- Water Gun, Bite, Withdraw, Skull Bash (1935 EXP.)

COOLTRAINER(f) $1505
Bellsprout, level 43- Stun Spore, Acid, Razor Leaf, Slam (774 EXP.)
Weepinbell, level 43- Sleep Powder, Stun Spore, Acid, Razor Leaf (1390 EXP.)
Victreebel, level 43- Vine Whip, Growth, Wrap, Poisonpowder (1759 EXP.)

	Head all the way east past them, hugging the south wall,
until you come next to a boulder next to a hole.  Just as you
did at Seafoam, push in the boulder and fall in after it, then push
it all the way left right onto the switch.  There's TM05:Mega
Kick above the switch, by the way.  Now the land mass is
unblocked and the exit is clear!  Take the newly accessible
ladder up in this room, take the ladder in the next room down,
and you've finally escaped Victory Road.
	Go around the structure and to the north, and you'll find
an area full of little statues.  This is Indigo Plateau.  Make your
way up through them and into the building.

Indigo Plateau Poke Mart:
Ultra Ball- $1200
Great Ball- $600
Full Restore- $3000
Max Potion- $2500
Full Heal- $600
Revive- $1500
Max Repel- $700

	This is it; you've finally reached the greatest challenge
in the Pokemon world: The Elite Four.  Your goal to become Champion
of Kanto is to defeat the Elite Four in order, one by one; but
if you lose, you have to start all over again (unless you save
before each battle!).  You also cannot heal your Pokemon (except
by items) in between battles.  Each of the Elite Four use a main
single type of Pokemon, but they are mostly rather obscure types
you probably haven't seen much of as of yet.  First things
first: Check out the Poke Mart on the left side of the building; it
has the best selection of healing items in Kanto.  After that, you
should be well-enough prepared by now.  If you examined your
Pokemon thoroughly after your last bout with Gary, you should
have found the weaknesses in your team that needed to be
corrected.
	If you're having huge problems with the Elite Four and you
just can't beat them all no matter how hard you try, you have
some issues with your team you need to straighten out.  If your
team of Pokemon is lower than around level 50, then you haven't
been doing enough battling and you need to train more in Victory
Road.  Your team also may not be well balanced- Electric,
Psychic, Ground, and Ice-types are the best Pokemon types to use
versus the Elite Four.  You can fill in the Electric and Ice
slots easily with Zapdos and Articuno; for Psychic, the best
thing to do is to raise up a Kadabra/Alakazam, and you can level
up a Dugtrio from Diglett's Cave.  A high-leveled team with
those Pokemon can rip through the Elite Four in a hurry.  If you've
saved any PP Ups, Elixers or Max Elixers from the past journeys by
placing them in your PC, now is a good time to put them back in your
inventory. When you're prepared, enter the chamber to begin your
battle against the first member of the Elite Four: Lorelei.

ELITE Lorelei (uses Super Potion) $5544
Red/Blue:
Dewgong, level 54- Growl, Aurora Beam, Rest, Take Down (2035 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 53- Supersonic, Clamp, Aurora Beam, Spike Cannon (2305 EXP.)
Slowbro, level 54- Growl, Water Gun, Withdraw, Amnesia (1897 EXP.)
Jynx, level 56- Doubleslap, Ice Punch, Body Slam, Thrash (1644 EXP.)
Lapras, level 56- Body Slam, Confuse Ray, Blizzard, Hydro Pump (2628 EXP.)
Yellow:
Dewgong, level 54- Bubblebeam, Aurora Beam, Rest, Take Down (2035 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 53- Supersonic, Clamp, Ice Beam, Spike Cannon (2305 EXP.)
Slowbro, level 54- Surf, Withdraw, Amnesia, Psychic (1897 EXP.)
Jynx, level 56- Lovely Kiss, Doubleslap, Ice Punch, Thrash (1644 EXP.)
Lapras, level 56- Body Slam, Confuse Ray, Blizzard, Hydro Pump (2628 EXP.)

	Lorelei, as you can see, is the Ice Master of the Elite
Four.  All of her Pokemon are part Ice-however, they also all
(except Jynx) share a Water type.  This means Electric types
really shine against her party, and they are your best option to
use against her.  Any team without an Electric-type will really
have a tough time ahead, especially due to the Freezing powers
of her Cloyster, Jynx, and Lapras.  If your Pokemon is frozen, it
can't move- it can't do anything.  So if you don't have any Full
Restores or Full Heals with you and a Pokemon gets frozen,
you'll pretty much have to restart.
	In all of the Elite Four matches, they use the same Pokemon
in all three versions but their movesets are upgraded in Yellow
to make the battles more difficult.  Dewgong, her leadoff
Pokemon, isn't a major threat.  It uses Rest to annoy you and
refill its health, but you should take that opportunity to pound
it into oblivion while it's sleeping.  The Cloyster can be
easier or more difficult, depending on if you have an Electric-type
with you.  Its Special is very low, so almost any Electric-type
attack will KO it in one hit.  Don't try to take it down with normal
attacks; its Defense is too high for that.  Also in Yellow,
Cloyster has an added threat of Freezing your Pokemon.  In
Red/Blue, the Slowbro won't do much, but in Yellow it's a
Special monster.  Its Amnesia raises its Special stat very high,
making it not only difficult to take out with Special attacks but
also makes its Surf and Psychic attacks very powerful.  Speed is
necessary versus Slowbro here.  Jynx is Lorelei's most fragile
Pokemon, and you can take it out with almost any of your
Pokemon, but you should still be cautious of its freezing Ice Punch.
If it puts you to sleep, play the Poke Flute to wake your Pokemon
up.  Lapras is a beast, with both Blizzard and Hydro Pump
attacks.  If a Pokemon gets nailed by Blizzard in most cases it
faints, so using Pokemon resistant to those attacks and
Electric- types is again necessary.  Don't be afraid to sacrifice a
Pokemon as long as you brought along some Revives.  Whatever you do,
don't use Grass, Ground, Flying, or Dragon types!  Those units
will be very much more susceptible to freezing.
	One down, three more to go.  Enter the door that opens to
find yourself in a boulder-filled room with the second Elite
Four member, Bruno.  Save and start Battle 2.

ELITE Bruno (uses X Defend) $5742
Red/Blue:
Onix, level 53- Rock Throw, Rage, Slam, Harden (1225 EXP.)
Hitmonchan, level 55- Ice Punch, Thunderpunch, Mega Punch, Counter (1650 EXP.)
Hitmonlee, level 55- Jump Kick, Focus Energy, Hi Jump Kick, Mega Kick (1638
EXP.)
Onix, level 56- Rock Throw, Rage, Slam, Harden (1296 EXP.)
Machamp, level 58- Leer, Focus Energy, Fissure, Submission (2398 EXP.)
Yellow:
Onix, level 53- Screech, Dig, Slam, Rock Slide (1225 EXP.)
Hitmonchan, level 55- Fire Punch, Ice Punch, Thunderpunch, Double Team (1650
EXP.)
Hitmonlee, level 55- Double Kick, Double Team, Hi Jump Kick, Mega Kick (1638
EXP.)
Onix, level 56- Screech, Earthquake, Slam, Rock Slide (1296 EXP.)
Machamp, level 58- Karate Chop, Leer, Strength, Submission (2398 EXP.)

	Bruno, the Fighting Master, follows a pretty simple
strategy: Beef up his own Pokemon with X Defend and other
defensive moves, lower yours, and then finally attack.  Unless
you let him build up his strength that much, Bruno should be
easier to defeat than Lorelei.
	Bruno uses two Onix and three Fighting-types in his party.
Both of the Onix, particularly in Red/Blue, are very simple to
defeat with any Water, Grass, or Ice attack, or even most super-
effective physical attacks due to its low HP.  In Yellow, don't
let his Onix use Screech without knocking it out right
afterwards; an Earthquake or Rock Slide really hurts when that
happens!  Hitmonchan and Hitmonlee are two sub-par Fighting-
types; Hitmonchan has a good variety but hardly any attack
power, and Hitmonlee has low Defense.  Machamp can be very dangerous
with Submission if your Pokemon have lowered Defense, but
fortunately it's too slow for Fissure to be effective.  Any
Flying-type on your team with Fly can easily decimate Bruno's
Fighting-types and render most of his attacks pretty
ineffective; and a Psychic-type such as Kadabra or Hypno works just as
well if not better.  Just prevent him from using one of his startlingly
powerful attacks on one of your weaker Pokemon, and you should
be fine.
	You're now halfway through the Elite Four.  Enter through
the door past Bruno into a grave-filled room.  Can you guess the
specialty of Agatha, the third Elite Four member?

ELITE Agatha (uses Super Potion) $5940
Red/Blue:
Gengar, level 56- Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis, Dream Eater (2280 EXP.)
Golbat, level 56- Supersonic, Confuse Ray, Wing Attack, Haze (2052 EXP.)
Haunter, level 55- Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Hypnosis, Dream Eater (1485 EXP.)
Arbok, level 58- Bite, Glare, Screech, Acid (1827 EXP.)
Gengar, level 60- Confuse Ray, Night Shade, Toxic, Dream Eater (2442 EXP.)
Yellow:
Gengar, level 56- Lick, Confuse Ray, Mega Drain, Substitute (2280 EXP.)
Golbat, level 56- Leech Life, Supersonic, Toxic, Wing Attack (2052 EXP.)
Haunter, level 55- Lick, Confuse Ray, Hypnosis, Dream Eater 1485 EXP.)
Arbok, level 58- Wrap, Glare, Screech, Acid (1827 EXP.)
Gengar, level 60- Confuse Ray, Psychic, Hypnosis, Dream Eater (2442 EXP.)

	The Ghost Master of the Elite Four uses very different
methods of fainting your Pokemon than the others.  Instead of
inflicting direct damage, most of the time she'll prefer to
first confuse your Pokemon with Confuse Ray, then either put them
to sleep and attack with Dream Eater (most common), paralyze with
Lick, or poison with Toxic.  To battle her effectively you need
to realize the importance of switching your lead Pokemon when it
gets confused; you can't afford to take the risk of damaging
yourself most of the time.  If a Pokemon gets poisoned don't
worry about it, but if it gets paralyzed make sure to cure it
with Full Heal or Full Restore.  Using the Poke Flute to awaken
a sleeping Pokemon can also be a lifesaver.
	Agatha uses three Ghost types- remember, you can't damage
them with any Normal or Fighting-type attacks, but besides that,
anything is fair game.  Because all of Agatha's Pokemon are part
Poison-type, a Psychic-type can sweep this team quickly, but
besides that you may need some help.  Attack the ghosts with
physical attacks more often because they have low Defense;
Earthquake and Dig are particularly dangerous.  The Golbat acts
similarly to the Ghosts but is easier to take out; use any Ice,
Electric, Rock, or Psychic attack to take it out.  The Arbok is
hardly a threat except for the possibility of it messing up your
Pokemon with Screech, Glare and Wrap.  Again, speed is your best
friend.  Lastly, don't forget in Yellow about that second
Gengar's Psychic attack!
	After the battle your Pokemon may or may not be severely
damaged by now; heal any injuries you've sustained from the last
few battles, make sure your PP gauges are in decent condition,
and enter the next room.  Walk down the corridor to battle the
final Elite Four member: Dragon Master Lance!

ELITE Lance (uses Hyper Potion) $6138
Red/Blue:
Gyarados, level 58- Dragon Rage, Leer, Hydro Pump, Hyper Beam (2659 EXP.)
Dragonair, level 56- Agility, Slam, Dragon Rage, Hyper Beam (1728 EXP.)
Dragonair, level 56- Agility, Slam, Dragon Rage, Hyper Beam (1728 EXP.)
Aerodactyl, level 60- Supersonic, Bite, Take Down, Hyper Beam (2596 EXP.)
Dragonite, level 62- Agility, Slam, Barrier, Hyper Beam (2895 EXP.)
Yellow:
Gyarados, level 58- Dragon Rage, Leer, Hydro Pump, Hyper Beam (2659 EXP.)
Dragonair, level 56- Thunder Wave, Slam, Thunderbolt, Hyper Beam (1728 EXP.)
Dragonair, level 56- Wrap, Bubblebeam, Ice Beam, Hyper Beam (1728 EXP.)
Aerodactyl, level 60- Wing Attack, Swift, Fly, Hyper Beam (2596 EXP.)
Dragonite, level 62- Blizzard, Thunder, Fire Blast, Hyper Beam (2895 EXP.)



	Dragons are certainly a type you haven't seen much of at
all- these mythical beasts have many type resistances, but one
big weakness: Ice!  If you have a surviving Pokemon in your team
with Ice Beam or Blizzard, you've pretty much got this battle
under your belt.  If not, you've got a tough battle ahead.  All
of Lance's Pokemon naturally know Hyper Beam- the strongest
attack in the Pokemon world outside of Selfdestruct and
Explosion; however, it takes them a complete turn to recharge
the attack, giving you two chances to strike back if you survive the
strike.  Lance also uses Hyper Potion to refill his Pokemon's
health; a way around this is to use a less damaging move first,
then attack with a powerful one to knock it out.
	Gyarados, the leadoff Pokemon, isn't weak to Ice, but
severely weak to Electric.  If you don't have any Electric
attacks, use your most powerful special attack.  The two
Dragonites have thankfully weak Hyper Beams and are easy to take
down in Red/Blue, but they mix it up a little bit in Yellow.
Make sure to remember that the first Dragonite knows Thunderbolt
and the second Dragonite knows Bubblebeam and Ice Beam so you
don't get caught in a bad match and accidentally lose a Pokemon.
Lance's Aerodactyl is lightning-fast and will most often get the
first strike, but fortunately it doesn't know Earthquake or Rock
Slide so it can't do a whole lot of damage.  It is also severely
weak to Ice, and has weaknesses to Water and Electric also.  The
Dragonite has an insanely powerful Hyper Beam that can knock out
almost any of your units, and is the biggest threat on Lance's
team unless you can use an Ice attack to quickly dispose of it.
In Yellow, Dragonite knows the three most powerful elemental
attacks, so all you can do is go blitzkrieg against it to knock
it out in the fastest possible way.  Overall, high-Defense
Pokemon are your friends in this battle, because they should be
able to withstand Lance's Hyper Beams with ease and knock them
out while they're recharging.
	You've finally defeated the Elite Four and become Champion!
Or so it seems.  What's that?  Oh no, Lance tells you that
someone else defeated him and became Champion before you did and
you have to beat him before you can claim the title yourself!
Who is this person?  Enter the next room to see..  (Save your
game beforehand!)

CHAMPION Gary (uses Full Restore) $6435
Red/Blue:
Pidgeot, level 61- Whirlwind, Wing Attack, Sky Attack, Mirror Move (2247 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 59- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (2350 EXP.)
Rhydon, level 61- Tail Whip, Fury Attack, Horn Drill, Leer (2665 EXP.)
Arcanine, level 61- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (2842 EXP.)
Exeggutor, level 63- Barrage, Hypnosis, Stomp (2805 EXP.)
Blastoise, level 65- Bite, Withdraw, Blizzard, Hydro Pump (2944 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeot, level 61- Whirlwind, Wing Attack, Sky Attack, Mirror Move (2247 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 59- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (2350 EXP.)
Rhydon, level 61- Tail Whip, Fury Attack, Horn Drill, Leer (2665 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 61- Dragon Rage, Leer, Hydro Pump, Hyper Beam (2796 EXP.)
Arcanine, level 63- Roar, Ember, Leer, Take Down (2875 EXP.)
Venusaur, level 65- Razor Leaf, Growth, Mega Drain, Solarbeam (2896 EXP.)
OR
Pidgeot, level 61- Whirlwind, Wing Attack, Sky Attack, Mirror Move (2247 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 59- Psybeam, Recover, Psychic, Reflect (2350 EXP.)
Rhydon, level 61- Tail Whip, Fury Attack, Horn Drill, Leer (2665 EXP.)
Exeggutor, level 61- Barrage, Hypnosis, Stomp (2770 EXP.)
Gyarados, level 63- Dragon Rage, Leer, Hydro Pump, Hyper Beam (2826 EXP.)
Charizard, level 65- Rage, Slash, Fire Blast, Fire Spin (2920 EXP.)
Yellow:
Sandslash, level 61- Slash, Poison Sting, Earthquake, Fury Swipes (2130 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 59- Kinesis, Psybeam, Recover, Pyschic (2350 EXP.)
Exeggutor, level 61- Barrage, Hypnosis, Stomp, Leech Seed (2770 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 61- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Confuse Ray, Fire Spin (2369 EXP.)
Magneton, level 63- Thunderbolt, Thunder Wave, Swift, Screech (2052 EXP.)
Vaporeon, level 65- Quick Attack, Aurora Beam, Haze, Hydro Pump (2791 EXP.)
OR
Sandslash, level 61- Slash, Poison Sting, Earthquake, Fury Swipes (2130 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 59- Kinesis, Psybeam, Recover, Pyschic (2350 EXP.)
Exeggutor, level 61- Barrage, Hypnosis, Stomp, Leech Seed (2770 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 61- Clamp, Aurora Beam, Ice Beam, Spike Cannon (2653 EXP.)
Ninetales, level 63- Tail Whip, Quick Attack, Confuse Ray, Fire Spin (2403 EXP.)
Jolteon, level 65- Quick Attack, Pin Missile, Thunder Wave, Thunder (2743 EXP.)
OR
Sandslash, level 61- Slash, Poison Sting, Earthquake, Fury Swipes (2130 EXP.)
Alakazam, level 59- Kinesis, Psybeam, Recover, Pyschic (2350 EXP.)
Exeggutor, level 61- Barrage, Hypnosis, Stomp, Leech Seed (2770 EXP.)
Magneton, level 61- Thunderbolt, Thunder Wave, Swift, Screech (2011 EXP.)
Cloyster, level 63- Clamp, Aurora Beam, Ice Beam, Spike Cannon (2698 EXP.)
Flareon, level 65- Quick Attack, Fire Spin, Smog, Flamethrower (2767 EXP.)

	Gary, the one who has been your Rival the entire game, is
primed for one final showdown between yours and his Pokemon.
Who will win?  You, if you've trained your Pokemon properly.  In
Red/Blue, Gary leads off with his trademark Pidgeot, which
thankfully still doesn't have Sand-Attack.  Use any of your
Electric or Ice attacks to take it down, or any physical Pokemon
in general.  Alakazam can be very deadly if it uses Reflect to
bolster its Defense; its Psychic attack is extremely strong.
Send out your fastest physical Pokemon and use your best
physical attack: Earthquake, Drill Peck, Body Slam, etc.  Don't be
afraid to sacrifice one of you Pokemon if you have to.  Rhydon is much
easier to handle; it doesn't attack except for Fury Attack, and
can be fainted using any Water, Grass, or Ice attack.  After
Gary's first three Pokemon, his team changes depending on his
starter and your knowledge of types comes into play.  Use Fire,
Ice or Flying attacks against Exeggutor and Venusaur; Electric
and Grass attacks against his Gyarados and Blastoise; and Water,
Rock or Ground against his Arcanine and Charizard.  Of them all,
the Pokemon with the most serious threats are Blastoise
(Blizzard, Hydro Pump), Gyarados (Hydro Pump, Hyper Beam), and
Charizard (Fire Blast).  Don't play conservatively, don't hold
anything back, come at Gary with full force and you should come
out the winner.
	In Yellow, it's his Sandslash leading off again, and it has
a nasty Earthquake attack waiting to knock out one of your
weaker Pokemon.  Knock it out with a good Water, Ice, or Grass attack.
The Alakazam here isn't as strong as in the Red/Blue versions,
because it has no Reflect.  Easily take it out with your best
physical attacks.  Exeggutor doesn't know any powerful attacks,
but it can still wear down your Pokemon with Hypnosis and Leech
Seed.  Wake up your Pokemon with the Poke Flute if it gets on
your nerves.  Again the last three Pokemon vary depending on
Gary's starter; however, you will always face Water, Fire, and
Electric types.  Use Electric and Grass attacks against Cloyster
and Vaporeon, Water, Rock or Ground attacks against Ninetales
and Flareon, and Ground attacks against Magneton and Jolteon.  Watch
out for Cloyster's Ice Beam if you're attacking it with a Grass
type.  Vaporeon, Jolteon and Flareon all have lousy Defense, so
keep that in mind if you're having trouble.  As stated before, use
all your strength against Gary, because this is truly the final
battle.
	When you defeat him, you become Pokemon League Champion!
Professor Oak walks in and leads you to the final chamber, where
all the Pokemon in your party are inducted into the Hall of
Fame. You get to have your Pokedex rated by Oak, and your Trainer

stats are displayed.  The credits roll past, and the words "THE END"
appear on the screen.  Don't let that fool you.  This game is
far from over.






________________________________________________________________
	11. Beyond
	Defeating the Elite Four, first of all, gives you access to
the Unknown Dungeon hidden around Cerulean City.  In it are wild
Pokemon much stronger than you've seen before, as well as the
ultimate Pokemon in the game: Mewtwo.  This makes it not only an
excellent place to train, but also a place where you can capture
many evolved Pokemon.  Bring as many Great Balls as you can hold
whenever you venture into the Unknown Dungeon, as well as your
best Pokemon.
	To access it, head over to Cerulean City, up Nugget Bridge,
and then to the left.  Surf down this river to the south and
you'll find a cave.  Earlier this would have been blocked by a
trainer, but you have nothing holding you back now.

UNKNOWN DUNGEON Wild Pokemon:
Land:
Arbok- Very Common (R)
Raichu- Common (R,B)
Sandslash- Very Common (B,Y)
Wigglytuff- Rare (R,B)
Golbat- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Gloom- Common (Y)
Parasect- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Venomoth- Common (R,B,Y)
Weepinbell- Common (Y)
Kadabra- Very Common (R,B)
Graveler- Common (Y)
Magneton- Common (R,B,Y)
Dodrio- Common (R,B)
Hypno- Common (R,B)
Electrode- Common (R,B,Y)
Marowak- Common (R,B)
Lickitung- Common (Y)
Rhyhorn- Very Common (Y)
Rhydon- Common (R,B,Y)
Chansey- Rare (R,B,Y)
Ditto- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Water:
Poliwag- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Poliwhirl- Common (R,B,Y)
Slowpoke- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Slowbro- Common (R,B,Y)
Krabby- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Kingler- Common (R,B,Y)
Horsea- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Seadra- Common (R,B,Y)
Goldeen- Very Common (R,B,Y)
Seaking- Common (R,B,Y)
Magikarp- Very Common (R,B,Y)

	The Unknown Dungeon has a completely different layout
between Red/Blue and Yellow, so I will divide this section of
the walkthru into two parts.  In all versions, be sure to explore
all new areas thoroughly for new Pokemon, and fish around in the
water for plenty of evolved Water-types.

RED/BLUE: Go up the path and ignore the first ladder, then Surf
around and take the ladder to the north.  On this floor there are
a bunch of winding paths, but all you can do here is go south
and grab the PP UP on the right.  Take the same ladder back down to
the first floor.  Surf to the left (the item on the single dry
space is a MAX ELIXER).  The path splits off again with a water
path to the southwest and a land mass to the north.  There's a
NUGGET on the land mass and a ladder which leads to the 2nd
floor; follow the path, get the FULL RESTORE and keep going to
reach the next ladder.  If you took the water path at the
intersection, it leads to another FULL RESTORE but ends up at
the same spot, so it's a sort of shortcut.  Where the two paths meet
up, head south, left against the wall and up the ladder.  Again
in the 2nd floor, follow the path right, down, left picking up
an ULTRA BALL, then up finally to get to the ladder.  Take it down,
then take the following ladder down to get to the bottom floor.
Wild Pokemon levels grow seriously high here.  From here, go all
the way right to get a MAX REVIVE.  Now go back and take the
obvious winding path to another platform above some water.  Take
the ULTRA BALL on it and zig-zag through the water and land to
get to Mewtwo's platform in the southeast corner!

YELLOW: Begin by Surfing to the left from the entrance.  Where a
path branches off north, you can get a MAX ELIXER.  Surf all the
way left then take the ladder up to the 2nd floor maze.  Follow
the northeast path to get an ULTRA BALL, then go down the
southeast path until it branches off north and south.  Take the
north path for a MAX REVIVE, and both paths meet up at the same
place.  Head up and take the ladder down.  Surf southeast for a
RARE CANDY, then go back and get the ULTRA BALL on the platform.
Head south and around to take the next ladder up.  Where the
path splits, take the north path for a FULL RESTORE, and the other
path goes down and then up against the east wall to the next
ladder.  Go southeast for a MAX REVIVE, then follow the path all
the way left to get to the 2nd floor maze yet again.  Go left;
there's a RARE CANDY to the south and the next ladder to the
north.  Take the next ladder down to get to the bottom floor.
Follow the winding path until it splits; get the MAX ELIXER to

the east and then go down the other path.  Where it meets a
river, you can get both a MAX REVIVE and an ULTRA BALL on the
platform to the left, and if you Surf to the right you'll get to
another winding path.  In the northeast corner is another ULTRA
BALL and in the southeast corner is Mewtwo's platform.

	Mewtwo is the strongest Pokemon in the game; a deadly
Psychic-type with insane stats and very difficult to catch.
Indeed, if you've saved your Master Ball for this moment, use it
now because you most likely won't have a better need for it.  If
you used it on a legendary bird like Articuno, though, do not
despair; it is not impossible to catch using conventional
methods.  The best way is by sending out your Articuno (or your
strongest Water/Ice-type Pokemon), use Ice Beam or Blizzard, and
hope it freezes him.  If Mewtwo is frozen, he can't move a
muscle, so he'll be easy to catch now with Great Balls.  If you
can't freeze him, you can try for paralysis or sleep, but it'll
be much harder.  Also be sure to lower his health as much as you
can before you start throwing balls, so your chances are best.
Remember, as long as you've saved beforehand, you can keep
trying as much as you want.
	After you catch him, the most powerful Pokemon of all is in
your hands!  Have some fun testing him out against the Elite
Four if you want.

	You now have explored every area of Kanto.  The Elite Four
is always open to your challenge so you can continue battling
them earning cash and experience as often as you like.  Your
main quest now, of course, becomes capturing all 150 Pokemon and
building a competitive battling team!  To enter the world of
competitive battling (which uncovers the true depth and beauty
of the Pokemon game) see section D.  You should have a substantial
collection by now if you've been slowly capturing them
throughout the game, according to the Wild Pokemon charts.  Need some
help getting those you missed?  See section C for complete charts on
both locations of every catchable Pokemon and evolution
requirements.
	Now if you're playing only one version, it's obviously
impossible to obtain all 150 Pokemon for your Pokedex, due to
version-exclusives, one-time-only event Pokemon
(Bulbasaur/Charmander/Squirtle, Hitmonlee/Hitmonchan,
Vaporeon/Jolteon/Flareon, and Omanyte/Kabuto), plus four Pokemon
that only evolve by trading.  This makes for a possibility of
125 obtainable Pokemon in Red and Blue and 129 obtainable Pokemon in
Yellow.  Of course, to complete your collection, you will need
to hook up with as many friends as you can and start some trades!